---
title: The Virtues Moralist
category: in-progress
---

# The Virtues Moralist
For reasons entirely selfish, I tend to think of morals as being
virtues-centered. This was very much considered out of fashion and has
its own flaws, but it does resolve certain issues.

Ethics are usually considered on the basis of one of two flavors:
deontologist (duty-based) versus consequentialist (outcome-based). A
deontological viewpoint is generally associated with adherence to
moral codes and laws, sometimes to an excess. Meanwhile, the
utilitiarianism of the 19th century is still a bit with us in the
West. As a result, a consequentialist viewpoint is something of a
majority. And it has its own intuitive appeal - rather than have to
guess at which laws should be abided by versus which ones should be
broken, you need only look at the situation at hand to evaluate
intelligently. As such, consequentialism is seen as the "practical" alternative,
particular when compared to fussy outdated codes, such as those
of the religious kind that are hard to defend in society nowadays.

However, there is a practical issue that, at least for me, renders
consequentialism unsuitable. You need to do two things to apply it
effectively:
1. Avoid motivated thinking in one's decisions
2. See perfectly into the future

I'm only sort of joking here. Motivated thinking is a serious issue,
particularly given what we know about human error and decision
making. By taking a consequentialist viewpoint, you are relying on
some rather defective wetware to make decisions for you. Are you
willing to accept that as you get tired and crankier through the day,
you are becoming a worse person, morally? And is it possible to really
see the consequenses of your actions?

So there's that problem, but a more subtle problem which may be more
important. The fact is, for 95% of our moral decisions we all,
deontologists and consequentialists alike, do it the same way - go by
habit and take the default choice. Does anyone really walk past the
counter at the drugstore and think "Yeah I really wanna steal that
candy bar... let me think, what would maximize happiness for myself?
The drugstore? The person behind the counter?" No, 99% of it is
convention. And it has to be that way. Why? Because many moral
decisions happen before you've even noticed it's a moral decision. The
fact that your brain tends to decide before you've given your decision
any thought, and then goes back and backfills your justification so
that you have a reason for doing something, is not your friend here.
To have actual space for conscious decision - let alone moral
decisions - is pretty narrow.

That gets to why I'm really a virtues moralist. I don't think people
really THINK. They rarely get a chance to. Weighty moral decisions?
They have the problem of coming up quickly without warning. What can
save you? HABITS. A virtues moralist is a deontologist who thinks that
what is important about living a good life is having moral
habits. That will cover 98% of your day to day life.

Note that I didn't say I'm _good at it_. I'm very good at certain
things. There are a few things like friendliness and courtesy that I
don't pay enough attention to, especially when I'm stressed. I'm quite
self-involved - hence this blog. I can only hope that people benefit
from my actions; I'm sure there are more direct ways of being
helpful. I'm not like Bill Murray at the end of _Groundhog Day_. That
being said, I'm good enough that I don't feel ashamed of myself that often.

What I do like about virtues morality, though, has nothing to do with
how it works for me. It comes down to something more simple and petty.

----------------------

The reason I like it is is that it serves as a guard against the most
common moral dodge of all - something I call the "frame game."

Western reason-based ethics, be they Kantian or Rawlsian, tend to be
very rights-oriented. Morality is seen as in terms of respect for the
rights of others, or perhaps within the balance of justice. On top
of that, as indicated, most of it is consequentialist and seen in
terms of ends. It is very easy, therefore, when you look at things
this way, to think of moral outcomes in terms of competing rights to
be litigated morally. You have made moral decisions about particular
atomic decisions, and each one of these can be argued one way or
another.

Here's exactly why there's a problem. Suppose I are a poor specimen
as far as virtues ethics. I have poor self-control, are quick to
step on other people who get in your way, tend to see offense where
none was given, and lie and obfuscate as naturally as breathing comes
to other people. I are, in short, an asshole, and ethics are
just a set of nasty rules made up by weak people to get in my way.

How do I handle moral decisions? They way to handle it, is to make
this litigation work for myself. This litigation plays out through
something called "the frame game." In short, for every moral decision
I make, I am going to frame it in terms of _my_ rights and how
_my_ rights are being "violated" if I don't get things _my_ way.

You've seen this game played if you've ever dealt with someone who
resides in one of the corners of "the dark triad"; e.g. a narcissist,
a sociopath, or a Machiavellian. Such people have no moral
consciousness as such - it is as if they are missing a soul. But such
people know what morals are, and the more clever of them have no
problems stating their case in moral concerns. So they become experts
at this "frame game." That is how they get others to comply: by
continually "framing" any moral conflict in terms that are excessively
flattering to them.

Were one to instead make such decisions based on virtue ethics, such
people would be ignored. For people lacking in virtue, moral judgment
is intrinsically suspect. In this sort of framework, such people's
rights will have more limited rights, and for good reason: any agency
or power they are given is very likely to be abused at the first
opportunity. If you can't trust someone with a burned out match or a
butter knife for fear they would hurt someone with it, why would you
give someone rights you wouldn't give to a 12-year old kid? To some
extent, this limits morality and gives license toward mistreatment of
such people, but we do the same with felons.

----------------------------

Are there problems with virtues morality? Plenty! But they may not be
exactly where you think. These are problems both for anyone whishing
to comply with virues morality and with those around him or her, and
for anyone wishing to simply recognize moral tendencies in others. These
problems can make effective virtues morality more
difficult and less natural, especially if you've been raised in a
rights-oriented culture.

Probley 1: People are very poor judges of character.

This is a proven fact. People are prone to be trusting and are
hardwired to place a lot of emphasis on physical cues, most of which
will be picked up subconsciously. Suppose you meet someone immediately
and pick up a "good vibe" - you just know instinctively this is a good
person. What does science say? Well, experiments tell us that one of
the most likely explanations is that you have met someone physically
attractive with various physical cues that indicating high social
status for your group and high social intellect. This is known as the
"halo effect." Unfortunately, the idea that upon meeting someone, you
are able to "see into their soul," is nonsense. If you've ever seen a
male friend goggle in the presence of a very beautiful woman that you
know to be a horrid person, you've probably found that no amount of
discomfiting information would shake his interest in her. You probably
chalked it up to lust, but it turns out even other straight women
will give her a huge amount of trust - the halo effect, it turns out,
is not sexual.

So here's the problem with judging the virtues of others. People make
snap judgments, to save time (no I didn't read Malcom Gladwell's
Blink, yes I'm sure it's interesting.)  To actually gauge someone's
character, you actually have to watch this person over a very long
time and see what they do. This worked great for humans in the
hunter-gatherer stage of evolution where you had to deal with the same
people in a small group over a span of months, but it is not something
people do quickly or naturally, it is not something people magically
get good at. Indeed, it is likely that our long evolution has made it
even more difficult to judge character, as it is much easier to behave
in a way that signals virtue than it is to be virtuous and
self-sacrificing. It is far more rewarding from a practical sense to
present the appearance of virtue to others all the while really
"looking out for number 1" than it is to actually be virtuous. This is
particularly if one knows one is being evaluated for virtue, say, when
dating or when evaluating job candidates. And there is no reason to
think that people who are particularly adept at pulling off such
charade would be at an evolutionary disadvantage as compared to their
virtuous associates. Quite the contrary. If narcissists and
psychopaths were not able to do this so easily, they still be in
juvenile detention at age 80.

I imagine one would get better at detecting virtue if one had also
eagerly sought to practice virtue throughout one's entire life. Such a
person would view the actions of other people through this prism and
would be able to see the signs of someone how had fought the same
sorts of struggles in their daily battle for virtue. This is a hopeful
sign - if you want to detect virtue, then become virtuous yourself -
but you still have to fight against cognitive biases like "the halo
effect" no matter what.

Problem 2: There is no guaranteed path to virtue

Well, I'm fibbing a little - actually there is. In fact, I have a book
at home called The Virtues Guide which is intended as a guide for
inculcating virtuous behavior in children. And there are plenty of
other such programs. But such "character education" is almost always
aimed toward small children with their pliable brains, and once
someone takes on their own program for character development, they are
well past this stage of development.

The problem with virtue is that you can't "train for it." If you want
to lose weight, you go on a diet; if you want to learn programming,
you take time out to educate yourself and go through starter projects;
if you want to get in better physical shape, you go to the gym. But be
virtuous? There isn't really a way to set aside three one-hour blocks
every week to "develop virtue." Perhaps you can pray and meditate for
lengthy periods; I doubt overdoing it really has an effect. I suspect
instead that doing this is a bit like stretching - it will make it
easier to be virtuous by keeping you in the right mindset. However,
what I have read implies that virtue grows by the dint of making
difficult decisions in those occasions when temptation arises, and
getting in the habit of doing the right thing in repeated
situations. And unfortunately, these sorts of decisions occur randomly
and unexpectedly throughout one's life, though moments of testing that
arise without warning when one may be tired, week or unprepared.

What guidance we do have comes almost exclusively through religious
channels. In the Baha'i writings we have a few things:

* Prayer
* Meditation
* Daily readings from the Baha'i Writings
* End-of-day reflection on ourselves and our struggles being a better
person ("Bring thyself to account each day")

In all honesty, this is one of
those things where faith comes in, where by faith, I mean acting from
the point of view of trying something out to see if it succeeds in
view of making it succeed. I'm not aware of any studies that prove
there is a causal relationship. It is easy, if you don't do those
things, to say that people who do these things so inclined because
they're virtuous by nature, and therefore to say these practices cause
virtue is to confuse cause with effect. I have no way of disproving
that. There could also be a backfire effect, in that if you practice
these to excess, you may regard yourself as virtuous and thereby
indulge yourself in the rest of your life, by thinking of yourself as
better than you really are, leading to the next challenge.

Problem 3: Virtues are very difficult to sustain, and hard to "litigate."

I have heard (though I cannot find the quote) that in the Baha'i
writings, Baha'u'llah identifies three great "attachments" that thwart
spiritual growth: 1) attachment to material goods; 2) attachment to
rank; 3) attachment to "the Kingdom of Names". #1 and #2 are in no
need of explanation whatsoever - there isn't a revealed religion that
hasn't warned of these dangers. But what on earth is #3?

To understand a bit, I have to explain a bit of Islam culture. In
Islam, God is said to have 100 names, of which 99 are known. (Bonus:
It is said that the camel has a self-satisfied, smug look because he
knows what all 100 names are.) (Bonus bonus: I believe Baha'i writings
indicate the unknown 100th name is Al-Abha - The Glorious. Now you can
ditch your camel.) So what are these names? Well, you can google them,
but the upshot is most of them are virtues. So when you're being
virtuous, you are quite literally reflecting God, per Muslim
theology. These are the names of which one speaks.

So why would attachment to these names be bad? The problem comes when one
is so attached to a virtue that one feels like they own it. In other
words, someone who wants their name identified with that virtue, to
the point that they no longer are doing it for love of virtue, but as
a sort of goal to be conquered, after which they can look down on
others who have yet to master it. The word smug comes to mind.

I am a strong believer that one should never use smug to describe
someone - it's the sort of thing that says more about the accuser than
the accused - a too-easy term more often used out of envy and anger
against someone who has caused no harm to anything other than a
rightly-damaged ego. So I'm not fond of using smug. However, virtue is
something one must work at without being self-satisfied in spite of
the fact it involves a bit of self-sacrifice, without at any time
feeling that on can either give up the race or let one's guard down.

In short, it can be exhausting. The solution to this exhaustion is, to
some extent, stress management. Not for nothing has prayer and
meditation been recommended by the founders of the great
religions. Virtue involves _repeated self-control_. Self control is like
a muscle. It has to be exercised frequently to stay in shape. It also
can be overworked and fatigued, resulting in failure when you don't
expect it. The way to keep this balance is to keep working at it
without putting yourself in a situation where it is fatigued and
constantly tested. This, more than anything else, is probably why
virtuous people yearn to live in just societies that do not unjustly thwart
the reasonable aspirations of themselves and their friends and family.

Another problem that virtues don't lend themselves to easy individual
acts. There are sometimes moral decisions thate are obvious enough,
but it is not clear which dicions to make, perhaps because of
competing virtues. But if things are really hard - then guess what?
You can drop virtues morals and be "consequentialist for a day." After
all, nobody said virtue alone would solve everything. For this, wisdom
too is a virtue: knowing when your habits and instinct won't solve
anything and treating hard problems as if they are hard problems. Go
ahead, get out the pencil and paper, do scenario analysis and litigate
away. Just realize that this really isn't how most moral decisions are
made. For most of your moral decisions, by the time you've even
thought about deciding, the time of decision has past.
