ar·ro·gant
[ˈerəɡənt]

ADJECTIVE
having or revealing an exaggerated sense of one's own importance or abilities

Let's take the above word. Supposing someone beliefs that people of a
certain culture are arrogant. There are actually two ways one can
"earn" the moniker arrogant:

1. Actually reveal an exaggerated sense of importance or abilities due
to claimed beliefs or thoughts.

2. Reveal *any* sense of importance to one who is trained to disregard
or think of you as beneath him.

I've been called arrogant a time or two. This is in spite of having
been counseled numerous times as being too reticent, not "tooting my
own horn," and generally having too low a self esteem to properly put
myself forward. Through life I get the feeling I'm less likeable than
your typical guy - if I were, people would have told me that I was
"too humble" instead of using the negative framings above. Still, when
I hear the word arrogant, I generally think of it as term that says
more about the speaker than about the person spoken about.

Part of this is because I can't stand backbiting, though I slip
myself. Unless someone exhibits pure d****ebag behavior, I have a hard
time disliking someone, unless they appear to do something
specifically to tick me or someone else off. But part of it is because
arrogant is often a shorthand for "how dare you make me feel bad about
mysef." I have yet to see someone complain about an arrogant person
who isn't overinvested in protecting their own ego. It's a bit like
the complaint about someone being "smug." I so often hear it applied
to someone who isn't self-rightesion but simply has committed the
"crime" of having one's sh!t together, morally speaking.

So we've been told that somehow recent anti-democratic and illiberal
movements are a result of "arrogance" by "the elites." When you dig
in, "the elites" they are complaining about aren't the people who
actually run the country or businesses; rather, it's just the fifteen
percent of of the people who had the wherewithal to get graduate
degrees or have some sort of "middle-class" profession. The arrogance?
Well, you have a difficulty getting these people to point to, um,
actual _behaviors_. We are instead treating to this drip drip drip
whine about how you can't tell rascist jokes anymore becuase "nobody
has a sense of humor." Move past this thing gruel of complains about
intolerance for thinly-veiled racism and you'll get to the real
matter: complaints about "big city values"
and not being able to feel safe in the city. Neither of which point to
actual behaviors.

Here's the real beef: people in cities make more money than people who
don't.

That makes people who don't live in cities really unhappy. You see, it
wasn't supposed to be this way.

I grew up in suburban Louisville, Kentucky. Obviously, it was close to
a city - this was suburban. It was in what I later learned was a
"white flight" neighborhood - full of people who had been German and
Irish immigrants who fled the arrival of African Americans coming in
from the country for jobs that these same people were not at all happy
about them taking. And we had our share of white people who moved in
from the country, for those same jobs. Naturally, because our
neighborhood was segregated, race was never discussed, aside from this
arms-length horse-manure of "that neighborhood was great, they ruined
it for everyone" or "they should take care of their own problems." But
that's was an aside - what is treally was full of, it seemed, was
people who just did not like cities. They liked their (relatively) big
yard and their subsidized low tax base, being, as most suburbs were,
in an unincorporated area outside of the city. And nobody can blame
them for that.

But about the cities? The unspoken assumption was All Those Big Cities
Are Doomed.

We could all hear our older relatives talk about how everything in the
cities was going down the tubes, about crime being out of control and
businesses moving out to the suburbs where the "real people" were. The
cold war just fed into this, as everyone was convinced that all the
big cities would one day be "nuked" leaving nothing but "real
Americans" in charge. This talk was fed by our neighbors from the
country who went to Baptist churches and read nonsense like _The Late,
Great Planet Earth_, which presumed that all cities would be destoyed
with hellfire of atomic oblivion. Apparently, it was ok to work in the
city, so long as you lived outside the dotted line on the map you
would'e been safe? Was that the idea?

And cities like New York? Forget it! They were dooooomed!!! What with
the out of control crime and taxes, everyone regarded John Carpenter's
_Escape from New York_ as if it were a nonfiction book.

When Reagan became president, this sort of stuff became ratified in
everyone's heads; it was not just a matter of biblical prophecy, but
in the near term, it was an economic certainty. Jobs would abandoned
the heavily-unionized areas in the north, the cities would wither
away, everyone with a brain would move to a low tax state into a
suburb with a nonexistent town center. Rural areas, too, would
benefit, due to the innate goodness of their citizens. Meanwhile, New
York?
California?
"Taxechusettes"? All doomed; all would see their cities wither and
die; their grand universities abandoned by those who discovered what a
real "good education" looked like.

The events of the last forty years have been exceedingly unkind to
those beliefs.

If you want to really piss someone off, don't tell them they're full
of sh!t. Show them they're full of sh!t.

That is where the charge of "arrogance" comes in. Instead of seeing
their fantasies play out, they've sat and watched in horror as the
least popular kids in grammar school go off to college and move to
someplace like New York or Raleigh or Austin and make a boatload of
money. Wannna make a boatload of money? Remeber all those cities that
they said would burn in hellfire? New York? San Francisco? Boston?
They're right up at the top. Meanwhile, all those cities you read
about for years as being "good for business"? The smaller, low-tax,
midmarket cities? Well, they're nice. But you had to pick lucky - only
certain citied thrived. Others have done ok, but you aren't going to
be able to sell a house you bought 30 years ago for a huge profit. Meanwhile,
those immigrants who moved into areas of Bronx, Queens and Brookly
that looked bombed out in the eighties and had the wherewithal to buy
property?

It is said that living well is the best revenge. Well, forty years of
ill will toward the big cities didn't do a damned thing. So that's why
city dwellers are arrogant. Not because we go around telling people
how to live their life.

