---
title: This Is Not About Scoring Easy Points
---

# Sometimes You Have To Speak Out Even When It's Obvious

I'm a Baha'i (for background, see practically every other column I've
posted). One thing I try to do to live up to my belief is avoid
writing about partisan rancor, and try (ok, maybe not all that hard)
to avoid provocative and agitated speech. I think my writing is mild
in tone, but that's generally due to overall wimpiness rather than
adherence to Baha'i philosophy. Working from a position of weakness,
not strength, is apparently my thing.

Be that the case... the topic today is the ludicrous racialist displays
that are apparently in the news. As Baha'is we are to investigate the
truth in all matters. I've been told by various people of varying
trustworthiness that there was an alt-right demonstration full of
peaceful people, that somewhere out there there is a violent alt-left
that is just as bad, and that there was "violence on both sides."
Perhaps there are those that think I should refrain from any comments
that could be thought of as partisan based purely on these claims.

Forgive me if I, of the hippie-dippy pacifist beliefs, spits up in my
herbal tea from the ridiculousness of the request and refrain from
taking such "facts" at face value.

Let's begin with this opening statement: there was absolutely nothing
about the alt-right demonstration in Charlottesville that was
peaceful. Not this demonstration; not any other alt-right neo-Klansman
demonstration, hood or no hood. If you are peaceful, you do not load
yourself up in arms. You do not carry torches like a medieval mob. You
do not chant antisemetic epithets. And if you are truly peaceful, you
do not go looking to provoke fights, particularly violent fights where
you view the odds in your favor. You do not view crushing someone with
a car as a cause for glee. And the fact that nobody actually pulled a
trigger and shoot anyone doesn't make the scene any less violent.

It is not being partisan to call out only one side, when the entire
conflict begins and ends with that same one side. It is not alt-right
versus alt-left; it is alt-right versus
goddam-near-everybody-else. The alt-right, in their beliefs and
actions, represent a rejection of every revealed religion since the
ancient times, and a particular strong rejection of the message for
this day and age. The fact that there has been an incident where
anarchists assulted an unarmed spokemen for the alt-right doesn't
change any of this. This is not a statement of partisanship; it is a
fact.

Jesus said that those who live by the sword shall die by the sword. I
see nothing in the Baha'i writings to indicate this has been
repealed. The the Baha'i writings do not use the word "Karma," but
they do refer to a "law of cause and effect." I feel it my duty to
point out this teaching. Shoghi Effendi wrote a book on the history of
the Baha'i Faith titled _God Passes By_. The title was a somewhat grim
reminder if the fact that the Baha'i Faith has somehow avoided
calamity in spite of the visitation of calamity upon those that have
rejected the cause and message. Certainly, trying to re-litigate a
civil war fought 150 years ago over slavery is a rejection of this
same cause. If I have any calmness in the face of this movement, it is
due to perhaps my cockiness that everyone involved with such movement
will come to a demeaning, ignominous end.

And don't pretend for a second that the alt-right movement in the
American south is centered around the defense of "honor" or "heritage." The
idea that there is a noble history to be defended in the south is
chimerical. The CSA was founded for one reason and one reason only:
the defense of slavery as an institution. It is central to every
document of its founding; the election of an anti-slavery president
was central to its _cassus belli_; and the subjugation of other races
was the bedrock of its philosophy. There may be those who rally to its
defense due to a thoughtless deference to tradition; much as I pity
the fool tho think that way, such people were assuredly not the people
who attend rallies armed to the teeth.

The reason I'm saying this is it is important, not only to remind the general
public where The Baha'i Faith stands; nearly every reputable
religion stands with us. No, there are several other teachings we must
remind the general public about:

* The degredation of religion continues at a breakneck pace. Nothing
  is more degrading than the sight of so-called religious leaders
  giving succor to known rascist beliefs as a way of keeping their
  congregation happy.

* The violent nihilistic philosophies of the twentieth century have
  not been rejected; rather, they continue to propagate among many,
  both the ill-educated and the powerful, who see in these
  philosophies the opportunities to better themselves at the expense
  of another, or glorify themselves through violence.

* Atheism, far from enlightening the masses, has at _best_ had a
  neutral neutral effect, and has probably hastened moral decline in
  some members of society. Most alt-right are nominally agnostic;
  their sectarian "Christian" identity their leaders will readily
  proclain is not about religious beliefs, but about "culture,"
  whatever that means. Arguably, the collapse and bastardization of
  Christian religious beliefs has obliterated whatever moderating
  influence might have saved the hapless victims of these predatory
  belief systems. The dream of atheistic "brights" that the loss of
  religious faith will result in a more peaceful world has proven even more
  ridiculous than the "sky god" they frequently mock i their writings.

These and other lessons are what the Baha'i Faith can teach in this
present day.

There are those Baha'is - and many like-minded individuals - who think
speaking out now is just racking up "easy points"; I mean seriously -
how hard is it to recognize that these movements are bad? Well, based
on opinion polls, apparently much harder than you think it is! And
based on religous leaders, plenty of them are too blinded by large
congregations and embiggened collection plates to notice themselves
losing their way. There is much work still to be done within the
Baha'i community. But keeping silent isn't going to help this work get
done - and in fact, could send exactly the wrong message. Good is good
and bad is bad, and you don't have to be an angel to remind other
people of that fact.
