---
title: Enough with this Foot Dragging on Outreach
---

# It Isn't Reverse Discrimination. It's Doing Your Job as a Hiring Manager.

I'm going to push back against a certain sort of chatter from wwf
(whiney white folk) in the engineering sector that I've been hearing a
long number years. It has to do with the fact that every time there is
some sort of "diversity-based" outreach, there is always a lot of
mumbling, challenging the very idea of such outreach. They claim the
problem is that it's a "waste of time" and a "pipeline problem."  The
loudest gripes always seem to come from individual contributors;
i.e. NOT people who are in a position to hire, who seem awful
confident of their opinions in spite of any lack of experience in the
field.  As for myself, I've been working in the field as a hardcore
engineer for 25 years and responsible for about 15.

As a hiring manager, I need to find talent wherever it is; the usual
explanation for slow hiring and limited candidates from people who
don't like these outreach programs is that the core problem is a
"pipeline problem." The objectors usually insist candidates must
come from a preferred set of schools, or have a preferred set of
degrees; generally schools at least as good as their own (but no
better than that - because _their_ school had an awesome engineering
program!) and hard-science degrees at least as rigorous as their own.

Well, it's a pipeline problem only in this sense: if you limit
yourself to just the preferred pipeline, you're not only going to get
the same sorts of people; you're going to be getting fewer candidates
and have to compete for those harder. While those who themselves got
in this pipeline doubtlessly like feeling special, they are not the
only ones qualified for the job - just the set of people most likely
to be so. If you as a hiring manager want great talent at a reasonable
cost, it behooves you to check other pipelines: think "solid hard
science majors who vastly outperform their peers at state schools" or
"liberal arts majors with unusually sharp critical thinking skills who
make big waves in their little pond." I could go on, but you get the
picture - these candidates aren't from the preferred pipeline, because
you have to find such talent and may need to train them.

Most hiring managers in engineering have a hard time looking past the
preferred pipeline. This is doubly so for desireable employers that
have the "pick of the litter" when it comes to job
candidates. Smaller, scrappier employers or employers outside of
technology generally have to broaden their appeal to nontraditional
candidates, so many are more flexible about this. But a FAANG-class
technology company can afford to hire "only the best" - and that means
hiring from the preferred pipeline only. Having settled on hiring only
that subset of candidates, their hiring managers usually remark "Gee, why is
it nothing but white guys and asians in the pipeline?"

All too often, the problem is diagnosed as the fact that the pipeline
isn't loaded with a suitably diverse candidate pool. This confuses
cause and effect. The reason being that the tendency to hire only from
the "preferred pipeline" is the biggest reason for the lack of
diversity. The children of the upper middle classes are
always far, far overrepresented in the hiring pipelines
for whatever next big lucrative field is. Their children clog the
preferred hiring pipeline because their parents know the system. It
was this way in investment banking before; now that there's "real
money" to be made in computer science, it's in computer science now.
These parents now know that computer science is a way to get ahead. So
they make damn sure their kids have every opportunity they can to get
ahead in this field.

So if you wait for your preferred pipeline to be representative of a
diverse cross-section of America, you're going to wait a long time -
almost by definition, the preferred pipeline will be overrepresented
by children of the current elites. Look at the preparation required to
be noticed for a foot in the door at an entry-level engineering job at
a FAANG-style company - early enrichment activities starting from
grade school, attendance at a top-flight engineering school,
internships as early as high school, coding competitions... Do you
think your typical working class parent even knows how to get their
kids involved in this? Is this sort of involvement even in their
values system? Is their overwhelmed high school guidance counselor
clued into this?  Growing up working class and going to a "commuter
college" in the midwest, I felt like I was always a step or two behind
a lot of the other people I was competing for slots with in the job
market.  I've seen very few qualified resumes from African Americans
or Latinos cross my desk, but I'd be willing to bet that if "working
class whites" had distinctive surnames, I could say the same thing
about them too.

And if you think the fact that there are so many talented candidates
of asian backgrounds undercut this whole argument, you are
mistaken. The very same dynamics are at work in Chinese and Indian
immigrants and their second-generation offspring. If you think the
people who immigrate over to America with the advanced degrees are the
sons and daughters of simple peasants working in rice paddies you are
sadly mistaken. How do you think they come over, a rowboat? These are
the children of the upper middle class over there, and the only reason
asians are overrepresented is because they are overrepresented
globally; there are simply so many of elites over there that can
afford to fly over here and pay full freight to get a Masters' degree
here.  I don't begrudge any of them their success - I'm in favor of
much looser immagration. But don't imagine that this is due to innate
merit; anybody who buys the "racialism" of American Rennaisance who
beliefs this is due to naturally higher intelligence and merit of
"northern asians" is a king-sized chump with no critical thinking
capabilities. And if you think it's due to some magical "cultural
advantage" they get from Confucianism or whatever, I'm skeptical; it
is more likely the same cultural advantages that the the children of
the educated middle class receive throughout the world. These people
have merit indeed - AND they were born lucky. As for the asians born
in this country, they are doubly lucky (I say that as father of two
half-asians).

To some extent, the major engineering companies that get all the press
- Facebook and the like - are the wrong employer to look to for
leadership in diversity hiring. There are always a handful of
companies that have their pick of everyone - and right now the FAANG
companies can prosper based on skimming off the piles of resumes that
come in everyday looking for a foot in the door. They will continue to
hire only from the preferred pipeline; most of them have too many
eager, qualified applicants for their jobs, so they could arbitrarly
exclude huge chunks of the hiring pool and still have enough great
candidates to staff up. However, you as a hiring manager should not be
emulating Facebook but taking advantage of them.  There comes a time
when the pipeline dries up (i.e., NOW) where you have to start hiring
not just what comes across your desk and matching keywords for
desireable schools and programming languages, but instead
start looking for raw talent. This means actually looking at the
brightest kids out of *shudders* state schools, and looking at *horror*
people who went to rigorous math programs or even *yikes* liberal arts
programs like philosophy where they might learn how to think instead
of how to get through a coding exam.

The company I work for company is a bit "old school" in our attitude
to hiring and training. We have solid legacy systems built on
languages that are no longer taught much (Fortran and C++). We hire
most of our people straight out of college, and a lot of our hires
come in knowing just the basics of coding. This situation was partly
forced on us because of our unique circumstances, but on the whole
this has had valuable benefits. On balance many of these "graduates"
seem to have more promise than some of the experienced people we
interview, because we're free to hire for talent, instead of being
limited to the pool of candidates who learned how to play the system
from an early age.

And *that* is how you are able to get a
diverse pool of candidates. And you'll not only do that, but get the
best hires too.


