---
title: Three Cheers for Moral Grandstanding!
---

## Three Cheers for Moral Grandstanding!
I'd like to believe this article on [moral
grandstanding](https://aeon.co/ideas/moral-grandstanding-theres-a-lot-of-it-about-all-of-it-bad)
is sincere. In this article, the author argues that much of the moral
philosophizing out there is, in fact immoral - in that it is an
attempt to _look good_ rather than _be good_. Perhaps this is
addressing a real harm, but I've been alive long enough to recognize
it as more of _this_: one more obfuscating sophistry that will become
a beloved tool by armchair "libertarian" pseudo-philosophers, who are
always trying to wish away ethics by somehow claiming it's "unfair."
The fact that one of the links it references leads to the website for
the "Adam Smith Institute" is a red flag, for those of you looking for
the political angle.

The article is a well-reasoned-looking piece which attempts to raise a
probably valid point - a lot of moral talk is about looking good, and
as such is an attempt to elevate a position in argument unfairly.
While the article does raise a point, there's a strong
element of "methinks the lady doth protest too much." With all the
moral problems out there, is this _really_ something that demands our
attention? Is people trying to "look good" really a problem nowadays?

It isn't the tone I mind - this is very well-thought out and even
handed piece. The problem is what it allows certain people to do with
this idea. "The problem is that it's hard to tell if someone really is
grandstanding," says the author. Well, duh. There is a lot of moral
talk, and if it's effective, it's _going_ to bother someone. That's
the point. If someone feels cornered, or if their conscience is
starting to pester them, their first reaction is to change the
subject, try to shut it down, or attempt to frame someone as immoral
for merely _bringing_ up the subject. Now they can frame the whole
conversation as "moral grandstanding" and they get to change the
subject, lest they be forced to defend their beliefs and look bad in
front of others. So no, I'm not happy about the author's line of
thought.

I do a fair bit of "moral talk"; in fact, this blog is to relieve the
need to do so in normal conversation. I suppose this puts me in the
category of a moral granstander. This article defines moral
grandstanding as "moral talk to project an impressive and morally
respectable image of ourselves." I don't do it for this reason. I do
it to make people who make immoral decisions look less impressive and
morally irrespectable. While this is almost identical, note that it
does not attempt to elevate me with respct to third parties. I won't
use violence, but I'm not going to be pleasantly quetist when I see
people things that affect others negatively.  Meanwhile, I drive a
prius, recycle, I don't drink or smoke, don't screw around on my wife,
I try to treat well everyone at work, close colleagues and not, and I
don't do other things behind their back to "get an edge."  All of
which are moral choices that I made without imposing anything on
others, and none of which I've boasted about anywhere aside from this
blog post. Yet all of these behaviors can certainly be framed as
"virtue signaling" by some jerkwad somewhere or other, either
in-person or in some article a "friend" posted to facebook. The
complaint of "out-of-control puritanism" isn't anything new, but I do
not yield anything to the dirt clods of the world that would allow
them yet another rhetorial arrow in their quiver.

The fact is, certain sorts of immoral behavior hurts everyone. We are
currently suffering from the results of a widespread belief that
putting dangerous, narcissistic children in charge of various
positions of extreme power is OK, as long as it is seen as giving the
middle finger to snooty teacher's-pet "snowflakes" that they've
disliked since junior high; and that this consideration overrides any
compelling duty to act like a mature adult in the voting
boothbooth. The fact that so-many self-proclaimed "libertarians"*
enthusiastically vote for candidates who openely, repeatedly espouse
authoritarian beliefs is virtue signaling all right - it signals a
lack thereof, and if there is Karma, the black eye that movement
receives from endorsing such politicians is going to stain its
reputation for decades. I, personally, am not going to shut up about
this stuff, no matter how much grandstanding you think it is. If it
takes the hectoring of millions to make certain people think twice
about making immoral decisions that affect others, I'm happy to
volunteer to play church lady, even if it all it earns me is the
offense of others.

As for you: Go ahead and moral grandstand all you want! You have my
permission - if indeed you ever needed anyone's permission (you
didn't). I'll cheer you on, and maybe I'll even bring popcorn for you
so we can both enjoy the show.
