---
title: Thanks Goodness for Little Favors
---
# The Start of Something Better Is Still Better

The news is suddenly full of sexual harrassment claims against
powerful men. This is sudden and unusual. What is sudden is the fact
that so many mainstream media (I'm using that descriptively, not
perjoratively) providers have suddenly noticed that this is a terrible
problem, it is going on, and it is newsworthy. What is unusual is the
fact that many of these incidents are not breaking news Allegations
against most of these people go back a very long time and are easy to
corroborate. It seems as though somehow there is a shift from an
attude of casual acceptance of a horrible status quo to an attitude
that this is a problem and that it is necessary and right to remove
offendors from positions of power where they can do further damage.

There are fair number of what one would call "social critics" who are
suspicious of the sudden timing of this. A few are sad, lost souls who
think this is a conspiracy to remind everyone about confirmed
allegations against political figures and media figures they might
favor. But most critics are wondering why it took so long to
acknowledge this was a problem. May of these critics, indeed, are the
same longform journalists that published airtight cases against these
powerful figures years ago, only to have their reports ignored or
roundly minimized; this in the same mainstream press that is now eager
to report these allegations. Such critics, therefore, are right to be
suspicious that this represents any significant shift in attitude in
society.

To which I would reply: this is the start of something better. While I
agree with you that it is only a start, I think it's worth
acknowledging that it is still something better.

A few weeks I started doing a study about virtues and character
development - mainly aimed at bettering myself, since I'm in no
position to advise others. In any case, it reminded me of some work
Lawrence Kohlberg did regarding social morality.

In his writings, most people are at the level of "conventional
morality." Of these most, probably the plurality of all grown adults,
follow a "norm-driven" morality. These are people who recognize that
laws are necessary for the good of society, and that additionally,
there are also fixed norms that should be enforced, if not through
laws. Whether something is truly right or wrong is still the province
of philosophers and the more morally developed, who frequently
critique these laws and norms. But still, the acceptance of laws and
norms by this group as a whole determines whether society as a whole
enforces these norms or if they become disregarded with resignation
and an attitude resembling "it stinks, what can you do."

There is a less developed level of conventional morality just below
that, in which people look to their own social group as a measure of
morality. Such people are liable to look at right and wrong simply on
the basis of what their peers and friends say is right or wrong. Such
people are susceptible to the norms of the group above, if only
through peer pressure.

And finally, under that level are the preconventional moralists. While
Kohlberg is quick to label this as a "stage" to avoid blaming, this is
the stage of the transactional moralist and sociopath, for whom good
and bad is a matter of whether one can get away with something or
not. In general, such people are too undeveloped  to
understand the need for norms and laws, which they regard as
moralizing nonsense for the weak. But they do understand the level of
morality just above them, that regards social cues as the arbiter of
moral behavior. They understand this not because they themselves
believe, this, but because it serves as a constraint on what they
believe they can get away with among their peers.

Here is what I believe is going on in the case of sexual
harrassmet. What we are seeing is the beginning of a change in
socially enforced norms. We have seen this many times before. In the
sixties, social norms changed around notions of explicit white
supremacism, going from tolerance to disapproval. In the eighties, the
same thing happened with drink driving. In the last decated, this
happened with gay rights. What we are seeing is a shift of norms,
where society as a whole goes from tolerating the existence of
something they know is evil to actively acting against that.

This most powerfully affects the thoughts of the group above in the
middle - the "lower conventional moralists" who look to their peer
group for guidance on ight and wrong. Why? Because even if they hang
out among a particularly venal crowd, they'll still have a number of
friends whose beliefs are driven by norms. In addition, they're as
expost as everyone to the clutural zeitgest. If everyone on their
favorite channel says that this is a big deal and it has to stop, they
will get the cue from those messengers that maybe it has to stop.

As a result, things go from being "wrong but tolerated" to "wrong, and
not tolerated" among the masses.

Even those without a conscience will learn from their social
group. They won't be convinced of of the wrongness of this sort of
thing - unless somehow they themselves are negatively affected by a
particular incident. But their friends will clue them in. As a result,
they will at the very least keep it on the "down low."

So in a sense, nothing has changed - what used to be wrong is still
wrong. But there is a wider recognition of the fact by people who
otherwise don't give a whit about good or bad, and simply go along to
get along. And when those attitudes change, everything can change.
