---
title: Is It Really Freedom of Expression that They're Fighting For?
---
## The Gig Is Up: We All Know It Isn't Really About Free Speech

I grew up in Kentucky, and went to a Catholic high
school. <unconnectedRant>Lots of people up in the northeast have this
"baby boomer" vision of what this was about - nuns who walked around
terrorizing poor children and Brothers who inflicted random beatings
and did creepy things to minors. This is craptacular Hollywood
nonsense. The school I went to had a positive reputation it earned,
and I wouldn't hesitate to send my children there.<endOfRant>

If anything, it was _more_ liberal and tolerant than the public high
schools I was surrounded by. One important reason was that it was
allowed to set its own textbooks and curriculum. That meant it was
able to teach history as it happened, and didn't have to put up with
any schoolboard nonsense about "preserving heritage," otherwise known
as "lying about history."

So they didn't lie about history. Instead, of the 11 years I attended
Catholic school for, I learned in each of these 11 years THE CIVIL WAR
WAS FOUGHT OVER SLAVERY.

None of the ludicrous garbage about it being over "State's rights." I
remember in every history class there was always some east-end
suburban child of upper middle class southern gentry sticking his hand
in the air to object that "It really was over state's rights..." as if
it was just being mean to insist on a truthful accounting, and that
we'd all be happer if we just insisted in this compromise reading,
which avoids making souther whites, y'know, maybe _feel guilty_ about
the negative parts of their culture. Of course their arguments were
face-saving nonsense, supported by only the most tenditious readings
of the record of history.

The issue of "state's rights" was always a red herring. The _only_
"state's rights" violation they were upset about was the right of the
state to protect the legal framework for chattel slavery from the
federal goverment, and that particular right is the one the civil ware
was fought over.  Were it truly about state's rights, we might be able
to rattle off a half-dozen equally important violations of state's
rights. But no, we can think of only ONE, and oh boy, is it a big one.

This is good illustration of common rhetorical
tactic used whenever someone wishes to defend a position they know to
be somehow or other morally indefensible.

That is: instead of arguing over whether something is right, you
instead argue over whether someone has a right to limit it.

---------------------

Why is this important?

Because we see this rhetorical con being once again used disingenously
over race.

Suddenly we now get claims that it is defensible to support the
neo-Nazis and white suprematist protests - not because one agrees with
them, but because of "free speech" considerations. And that "political
correctness" is keeping us from having difficult conversations that
are necessary to move the nation forward.

Once again, someone has decided that they can't defend something
morally, but would instead like to move to a higher ground where there
is a defense.

If you are in the ACLU, then you get a pass. Groups like the ACLU
defend all sorts of odius people without distinction. I can't back
them, but at least they're consistent.

Instead, let's look at many of the other people who are suddenly
concerned about "free speech" for white suprematists.  Have they
stepped up for free speech rights for leftist radicals? Militant muslims?
Paroled felons? Hardly. On the contrary, the only time
they seem concerned about free speech is when the speaker is either a
right-wing speaker or a well known racialist.

It's about "free speech" in the same way that the civil war was about
"state's rights." When people backed the civil war, they had exactly
*one* state's right in mind: the right of the state to protect slavery
as an institution without interference by the federal government.
Likewise, when people care about "free speech" for right-wing hate
groups and neo-Nazis only, this is not about "free speech." They are
supporting free speech for *one* element of society only: that element
that believes it necessary to marginalize other cultures through brute
force.

The purpose of supporting this particular element of "free speech"
is to create an environment where these sorts of ideas are
discussed, accepted and pervasive. This is proven by the fact that
these same people have proven eager to decriminalize the use of
violance against anyone who would dare raise their voice in protest.