---
title: The Right Kind of Uncool, Part I
---

# The Right Kind of Uncool (or, About Progressive Rock)
## Part I

Progressive rock is in the news again.

Well sort of. In as much as you see the occasional headline on rock
anymore, which is infrequent, and on the near-comotose genre of
progressive rock, which is even moreso.

The source of the hubub is David Weigel's new book ["The Show That
Never Ends: The Rise and Fall of Prog
Rock"](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0393242250/). This is the sort of
glossy book that used to show up, unnanounced and perhaps unloved, in
the Barnes and Noble's music section, or maybe in the waiting room of
your son's guitar teacher. The sort of glossy labor of love that you
suspect has earned the author nothing but heartache, headache and a
debt-laden credit card.  However, this particular book has garnered
much more press than is usual for these sorts of works. David Weigel
is a well-known political writer, and excerpts from his book have
appeared years ago in a [multipart series of articles in
Slate](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/prog_spring/features/2012/prog_rock/history_of_prog_the_nice_emerson_lake_palmer_and_other_bands_of_the_1970s_.html)
and recently in [the Daily
Beast](http://www.thedailybeast.com/take-a-cruise-with-musics-uncoolest-people). Similar
headlines were made with [Yes' long-delayed 2017 induction into in the
Rock & Roll Hall of Fame](https://www.rockhall.com/inductees/yes),
something that fans of years before had thought unlikely and critics
thought ludicrous.

However, what inspired me to write this was something of a far more
gassy nature: a rock book describing an indie-rock band in terms so
pretensious and pompous as to make any prog rock fan blush. Apparently
someone thought [The Strokes (remember them?) were the center of the
music universe in
2001-2002](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/music_box/2017/06/lizzy_goodman_s_meet_me_in_the_bathroom_reviewed.html). Yet
I'm sure the writer would have hated progressive rock. You see, rock
critics *hate* progressive rock. The reasons I'd never given any
serious thought, but this, um, _specimen_ of a book has helped me to
see why exactly rock critics turned on progressive rock.

Presently in 2017, questions about about progressive rock always
center around _why_ people continue to listen to this music. The
almost-entirely male fan base seems to be a handul of easily-mocked
baby boomer obsessives, interested in only hearing repeats of LPs from
forty years ago. Looking at the present, one wonders what was so great
about progressive rock in the past, and how it caused a movement so
fierce that the backlash continues to this day? What is it about these
acts that is so horrible?  And if these acts, which are generally
regarded as extemely musical competent, are horrible, why are other
genres like teen pop, europop, death metal and other musics distinctly
repellent to ousiders generally exempt from this sort of ridicule?

Because I'm a disorganized sort of person and because people like
numbered lists for some reason, here's a numbered list of things
people get wrong or misremember:

1. There wasn't a 'prog rock' at the time. Some might have called it
'art rock,' a term that was also applied to a lot of other ambitious
but musically unrelated acts. Also, some acts such as Pink Floyd
weren't even considered 'prog' at the type, but were instead lumped in
with other long-forgotten genres; in the case of Pink Floyd, this was
the long-forgotten 'space rock' genre, a meaningless term unless
you're also one of the 10 remaining living beings that remember
Hawkwind.  remember space rock. Rush wasn't prog; they were simply
viewed as a hard rock band that aspired to pointy-headed
pretensions. Additionally, well-regarded seventies acts like David
Bowie, Eno and Frank Zappa have never been labeled as "Prog" in spite
of catering to nearly-identical fan bases and having nearly-identical
musical pretensions.

2. Reading about the reaction to prog, you would think that these were
THE big acts of the seventies; chart-toppers, whose sales competed
with the likes of Led Zeppelin and the Rolling stones. While some were
big (particulary their live shows), aside from Yes and ELP, their
album sales certainly put them into "cult act" status - better than a
run-of-the mill hard rock band, but nothing like the big acts like Led
Zeppelin and Rolling Stones. Additionally, radio play, which was
granted as an indulgence to the DJ's in the early seventies, became
much more limited in the mid-seventies as FM stations professionalized
and stopped letting their DJs play 10-minute epics.

3. Rock critics were initially very favorable towards the more
accomplished acts during the early seventies, when the
strongest albums came out. Albums like King Crimson's
"In the Court of the Crimson King" and "Red," Yes' "Close to the
Edge," and Pink Floyd's "Dark Side of The Moon" had no trouble
breaking into critic's top 10 charts at the time.

Given the facts as I report them above, why the severe backlash? Why
toward this particular musical movement, and not several other equally
successful subgenres of the seventies?

True, the movement didn't exactly wear its popularity well. The
movement was particularly beloved by affluent teens and the fan base
was overwhelmingly male. Some of the bands, ELP in particular, had
rather obnoxious opinions about about rock music in general. A loud
subset of their fans were particularly cultish and snotty. Finally,
the rise of punk coincided with a wholesale across-the-board decline
in the quality of the releases by bands like Yes, Genesis and
ELP. From the years 1977 on, one reason it was hard to find a positive
review of a progressive rock band was because most of them just
weren't worth a positive review.

But there was something else that was going on. The problem laid not
with the music itself, but with the critics themselves - the people
who earned a living writing about rock music.

You see, rock music critics do not really write about music. If you
read a review, you will see they are much more inclined to write
_around_ the music. Most music journalists haven't a lick of musical
training - certainly not enough to talk about music itself with any
precision. So you get an excessive focus on lyrics, which some bands
will freely admit are put in as an afterthought, combined with lots of
lifestyle critique.  As was succinctly described as Frank Zappa, rock
journalists were: " people who can't write, interviewing people who can't
talk, for people who can't read." Music? Not in the equation.

Probably the ultimate ur-critic of all of this is Lester Bangs, who
famously hated progressive rock from the beginning, right when his
fellow critics were praising it.  Part of it is people's taste - some
people just like their music more straightforward and don't like
competing melody lines and complicated arrangements. But the more you
read about it, the more you realize: prog rock - and more serious
music in general - just isn't very much fun to write
about. Journalists need a story; Lester Bangs knew how to tell a good
story; and prog rock _itself_ wasn't a good story. Outside of the
music, you were left with the scene - a crowd of geeky males absent
women which was just about The Worst Place in the World To Get
Laid. And you have the musicians, who are so serious about their work
that it makes it seem like _a job_. Who wants that?

Back to that book about the Strokes. Whatever you think of the band
(and I though they were just oh-KAY), they were obviously a lot of fun
to write about, enough to merit an entire dam book about the early
naughtie's music scene in the Lower East side as if it was a
fully-develped scene spawning dozens of great acts. This
mythologizing, I must remind everyone, is the exact OPPOSITE of the
truth. I lived in New York at the time, even briefly living in the
same hallowed Lower East Side that was the epicenter of this
scene. There was no there there. If you dig up some old Village Voice
column from the time, you'll fact see plenty of handwringing about the
fact that New York City didn't have a vibrant original scene like
Seattle! The article I referenced above posits a competition between
Lower East Side and an up-and-coming Brooklyn scene that did not
exist, because the Lower East Side scene was invisible nationally. In
fact, other than The Strokes and The National, no New York musical
acts at the time managed to register nationally. So this is the same
anemic scene which is now being represented as the center of
musical world at 2002? I have a hard time buying that.

Acts like The Strokes had to become big - because they were so much
fun to write about. These guys were Living The Rock And Roll
Dream. You can fill up a book with something like that. And THAT, my
friends, is what the rock music writers are looking for - not musical
values.

Meanwhile, nobody was worse to write about then Prog artists. Many bands,
such as Yes, were already in their thirties by the time they formed,
and the technical demands of the craft kept most of them too busy and
away from drugs and exciting parties with groupies. It didn't get any
fun until the mid-seventies, with the bizarre excesses that began
festooning the scene in the mid-seventies - bizarre spectacles like
Liztomania and Rick Wakeman's King Author's Court on ice. Given such
performances,  combined with a drop-off in quality from new records,
the fact that every big act in Britain in the mid-seventies seemed to
be going "proggy," and the fact that rock journalism became a
burgeoning industry fed by writers who tended to ignore the whole "music"
part of the equation, by the late seventies the Lester Bangs school
was ascendant. It became all schadefreude, all the time.

Of course, none of this actually speaks to why people listen and why
the music has fans. And okay, _I get it_, there are valid reasons not
to like this stuff. The Beatles and Stevie Wonder were capable of
doing amazing, innovative music without losing the public in the
process, whereas groups like King Crimson seemed to take a perverse
delight imposing music of bewildering complexity on hapless
listeners. But the reason The Beatles remain adulated is because it's
friggin' hard to do. To fans of progressive rock, it's better to come
close to that peak and fail than it is to never try, and better to
create interesting music than provide yet another iteration of
blues-based AABA songs that doens't push the ball
forward.

Next post I'll discuss what was _really_ unfun about progressive rock,
and where the n00b listener can start.