Today's society, particularly the urban societies most live in, is
individualistic. In such a case, the world "community" takes on a
particular warm glow. It may even be a nostalgic glow - thinking of
bygone close-knit villages, or of established civic and church
organizations of long ago. Those who grew up in small, close-knit
communities where they were on the outside, due to religious beliefs,
race, sexual preference or otherwise, may not have the sort of postive
beliefs about said communities. But these are the exceptions.

Indeed, perhaps about 20-25 years ago, there was a movement afoot
called "Communitarianism." The goal, politically, was to reintroduce
the sense of civic involvement and responsibility that were missing in
much of American life. Online quizzes would show whether or not you
were a communitarian or not. Meanwhile, books like Robert Putnam's
_Bowling Alone_ noted the decline in civic organization and community
life in America and worried about the effects it would have on respect
for civic institutions, government and respect for democratic norms.

Such worries appear to have been well-founded. A distinct lack of
community and belonging is noted in many of the classes that have
formed the primary backbown of resurgent alt-right groups and the
associated decline for respect of democratic institions and liberal
values such as freedom of the press. Notably,
alt-right membership is associated with lack of belonging an anoemie,
particularly in well-educated but unsuccessful subgroups in society
disconnected from normal communities. Such people may cling very
strongly to a "Christian" identity, but rarely, if ever go to
church. Indeed, one of the strongest predictors of whether someone voted for
the current President in the Republican primary was if someone
strongly identified themselves as "Christian" or "Evangelical" but
never themselves went to church.

Meanwhile, Baha'i writings such as _Century of Light_ identify
excessive individualism as both a hallmark and a problem of current
Western society. Part of this is from a moral point of view - someone
who is individualist is likely to think of their needs first, and of
the needs of others conditionally if at all. But there is also a
respect for communities as a requirement of civic involvement.

However, the type of community is quite critical. I'll identify two
sorts of communities - "open" communities and "closed" communities. It
turns out "open" communities are vital and critical. The most critical
ones are the cosmopolitan, open religious communities, and are
particulary the only long-lived such communities. "Closed"
communities, themselves, are more popular, but their excesses are
themselves responsible for individualism. Finally, the open religious
communities have been the most responsible elements for the
propagation and maintenance of democratic and liberal (in the
philosophical sense) values, and their decline is directly correlated
with the current problems of today.

-------------------------------

Throughout much of human history, mankind lived in small closed
communities. This was of necessity. Much has been written about this -
the first hunter gatherer tribes of 100-200 people, made possible with
our large forebrains, were responsible for putting Homo Sapiens on top
of the food chain. Long before we had built formidable tools, our
ability to cooperate in a complicated fashion put us on to of the
"food chain," and outside of Africa, where animals co-evolved
alongside primates, as soon as people moved into the area they quickly
depopulated all major megafauna through this ability.

Indeed, much of what we might call "common-sense" morality results
from our ability to work within these small-knit communities in close
cooperation. The first true cities did not occur until perhaps ten
thousand years ago. And most people continued to live in small
villages of relatively similar size until perhaps two hundred years
ago. By that time, we, humankind, have evolved to work in small
groups. This means a particulr sense of community that goes with
it. Some of the "natural" morals of this include:

* Fairness: a necessity when you think of the need to work together
  while penalizing free riders. This is similar to justice but less
  abstract; it works on the basis of reciprocity.
  
* Honor: attempts to work on behalf not only of a community, but your
  family within the community, since if your family is dishonored they
  risked expulsion from the community.

* Loyalty: if someone is in the community, you need to work on his or
  her behalf even though you may not particularly like him or her.

* Trustworthiness/Reliability: community members should be able to
  count on you.

* Respect: giving someone the honor deserved based on contributions to
  the group as a whole.

If you are a secular - and particular if you are a "naturalist" - you
will think this is the end of the story, as far as morals go. This is
what we are bred with, these are the parameters we have to work with,
and we must make the best of it.

However, there are a set of virtues which are NOT present naturally
with respect to small communities. Yet we still treat these as
virtues. Where did these come? We shall get to that later.

------------------------------

Alongside our shift into cities, another shift occurred into the
marketplace. Today, virtually everything works in a
marketplace. Indeed, the entire world economy as a whole works as a
unified, single marketplace.

The shift to paper money a double-book bookeeping is usually thought
of as the technological prime driver which allowed this move. Sure,
there was "hard currency" minted by the government, and this allowed
some of the efficiencies necessary for a marketplace. Indeed,
mercantilism - literally, the drive for hard currency to power the
marketplace - was a primary driver of the first imperialist forays
into the new world. But prior to paper money, the bulk of humanity,
not connected with the cities or the elites in government, generally
lacked hard money.

 The underlying premise is that before this happened, everyone traded
via barter - an inefficient mechanism. Friedman's famous experiments
had shown that even in primitive cultures, there were marketplaces
that exchanged goods, and barter was a necessity for commerce. There
had never been a time without a marketplace.

Unfortunately, this narrative, which is believed by many Americans, is
quite false. There is no evidence that there was ever an economy where
barter was a significant part of the economy. Throughout much of
history, most of the economy simply wasn't on the
marketplace. Marketplaces, far from being the universal cultural
driver, tended to be very small, minor affairs compared to the bulk of
the economy. The problem itself was simple - people generally trade
from surplus, and in an agricultural community, where skills are
generally similar and growth cycles are identical, people tend to run
surpluses in the same sort of things. There was of course some
specialization for the handful of people in the larger towns and
cities, but those had access to hard currency. No, the bulk of people
made to without a formal commerce. And they had to do it without
barter. What, then, did they do?

This is where our natural, community-based morals come in. Let me
introduce you to something called "The Gift Economy."

In a gift economy, people generally give of their surplus without an
immediate payment expected in return. But of course, sometimes they
need to receive. How does this work? It would seem that you would have
a really bad problem with free-riders. Well, you would, but you have
to remember these critical things:

- Everyone lived in small communities
- You saw everyone else on a day to day basis
- And people have certain moral instincts that act within the context
of such communities.

Keeping these things in mind, how do you think people worked? Well,
they expected to get paid back, of course! And if you received, you'd
know you were on the receiving end and would instintually feel guilty
if you didn't return the favor eventually somehow. And you also knew,
generally, what something was worth. When someone gave you eggs when
everyone was running a surplus, you were polite and might give them
something back that you didn't need, and that would be the end of
it. But if in the middle of a famine, your neighbor gave you eggs and
kept your children from starving, you knew you owed her BIG TIME. And
If you attempted to settle the score with something large, she
may protest, but she wouldn't be surprised, and she would feel no need
to give additional gifts to settle the acocunt.

This isn't a lot different than in professions where you're expected
to get things done through a large network - skilled people
professions like sales, marketing and business development, where
people have extensive rolodexes and are constently calling on one
another to give or offer favors. Indeed, it works in any professional
field. And the thing that makes it work are the bounds of
community. Why? Because it ensures everyone is contributing to at
least some extent.

When this fact is recounted, especailly to religious people, they tend
to regard concepts such as "the gift economy" as moral and
heartwarming. This is misleading. The gift economy is _not_ to be
confused with charity! This is not giving without something back. The
limitations of community present clear limitations of the gift
economy. Think about it:

* A stranger wandering through the village will find it difficult to
  get hospitality. Without hard cash, they will not be able to pay for
  lodging, and they will not be in town long enough to return the
  favor, so people will be reluctant to lend a hand.

* Those that are disfavored by the community, perhaps as a result of
  not "fitting in" religiously or ethnically, will be at a
  disadvantage. Many will not exchange with such people, or when they
  do, it will be at a disadvantage or no favor will be returned.

Think about this scenario. An African-Americal walks to the counter of
the Woolworth's in Virginia in the early 20th century. He slaps down
some money and attempts to order a drink. The person behind the
counter says "Sorry, your money's no good here." What just happened?
That cleark is opting out of the market economy and using the
economy of the community. In that economy, any exchange is regarded in
the context of a transaction within a community. Contrariwise, one
does not to business with one who is outside of the community. This is
what the clerk is signaling. The clerk is also signaling to other
white community members who are present that he will maintain
exclusivity to this community - a gift, of a sorts, to other
whites, to let them know the hospitality of the business is a
privelege to be shared only with them. This behavior, then, is
entirely in keeping with community morals. It is also entirely immoral
by any other measure. Indeed, this is one case where justice would
have been served best by unfettered capitalism, and adherence to the
green color bar ("I'll take any money, as long as it's green").

Now, let's go back to the larger cities, of, say, the past two
thousand years, where hard money was used. Would this sort of thing
cut it? Not so much! Certainly, there were counterexamples, such as
the Jewish ghettos, where Jews traded among themselves not so much out
of preference as necessity, due to exclusion by the Christian
community. But in general, hard money was going to be used and
offered. City economies would not work without the necessity to trade
and work with members outside of the community. Yet obviously, cities
and towns flourished. In the past two hundred years, the trend has
dramatically accelerated, to the point where the situation has
reversed, and now few people live in small communities. In this
situation, the gift economy is entirely unsuitable, as you concievably
never see the person you are doing business with again. So the
the money and marketplace is necessary to work together.

But something else is necessary. Given that
"natural" morals are built for survival in small communities, one
would think that this would be an unsustainable transfer. Wouldn't
humans be morally incapable of living in cities? Wouldn't our clannish
nature gradually overtake our economic incentive to do so? Certainly
not. However, there are other virtues that have allowed us to work
together and these are instructive and should be studied. At this
point, one of the challenges is coping with the fact much as
industrialization has forced people to adopt new moral codes to work
and cooperate with people outside of our city, we need new moral codes
to work with humans on a global scale. Yet where will these come from?
The answer is the same as it was for the morals necessary to live in
the cities.

-----------------------------

To live in cosmopolitan society, one needs a set of what I would call
"cosmopolitan virtues." These are virtues not present in
community-based virtues. Some of these would include the following:

* Justice and evenhandness: giving each his or her due reward,
  regardless of community membership.

* Compassion: ability to feel for others regardless of situation.

* Tolerance: ability to work with others from outside of what you feel
  is your own community.

* Idealism: recognition that there the right life is not defined by
  the community but by things outside of the community.

* Charity and kindness: ability to give to others (in the sense of
  gift economy) even though one is unlikely to be paid back.

Where did these come from? The mere fact that this is a Baha'i
telegraphs my thoughts on the matter.

Throughout much of history, there was not a concept of something
called a "religion." Or rather, it wasn't a distinct thing. You were
in a community, your community had beliefs about morals and religious
things, and that was that. Community itself was bound up in religion
and vice versa. If you go back about three thousand years ago, you
will see that this is so.

However, there were major developments, starting around 3000 years
ago, that changed this. Spiritual ferment, happening in different
places and in different times, produced three major religious
movements, whose ramafications spread throughout a wide radius through
what was then the "civilized world" of Asia,
Europe and North Africa:

Buddhism
Christianity
Islam

These three world religions, little noticed at the time of their
founding, spread across the globe such that by 1000 AD, entire nations
were under sway of these religions. Unlike earlier religions, they
were not married to a community, culture or even a nation: they
presented themselves as universal, cosmopolitan religions, fit for any
believer willing to believe.

In roughly the same time, other religions saw dramatic reformation
efforts which made them more universal in scope. In India, works like
_The Upanishads_ made it possible to talk about the many flavors of
Hinduism as a single faith. And as for Judaism, prior to the "Jesus
movement," it had spread throughout various Greek communities
independent of claimed Israeli nationality, and the Jewish reformation
efforts after the destruction of the temple in the first centry AD
made it possible to think of a Jewish religion independent of the
Jewish people. As a result, one could say religion was not really
"invented" until this time.

Note that this formulation is in terms of a Baha'i cosmology;
e.g. spiritual progression as a cycle of revelation. There have been
other religious writers that have made similar discoveries; e.g. the
proposed "Axial Age" of Karl Jaspers, popularized through writings
such as Karen Armstrong's _The Great Transformation_. From a Baha'i
point of view, the distinctions between a so-called axial age and the
manifestations are a bit of a "poTAYto / poTAHto" distinction - you
don't have one without the other.

The important think about this is that all of these universal
religious placed a novel emphasis on the "cosmopolitan" virtues - and
reformations in Judaism, Zoriastrianism, Hinduism, Jainism and Chinese
thought (Confucianism and Taoism) made it possible to think in terms
of moral virtues that made life within and across entire civilizations
possible.

From a secular point of view, this would seem to be simply an
adaptation to changing points of view. Yet this presumes that this
would have happened without religious movements. Of the secular
movements to occur in the axial age, perhaps the Greek and Roman
philosophical movements are the most significant. Yet it took Muslim
and Christian philosophers and scholars to spread and popularize their
thought beyond their original matrix in Greek cultural life. To go to
a purely secular thought system to revolutionize moral thought, you
have to go forward to the liberalism of the enlightenment - and that
was originally rooted in Christianity as well.

Where does that take us? Where that takes us is that the "instinctual"
morality that we share as a human race is a decidedly incomplete moral
birthright. It grants us the ability to act thoughtful to friends and
family. Yet it seems to guarantee a state of prepetual conflict
of one sort or other between communities. To get along in cities and
to get along between communities and nations requires the unity that
only more cosmopolitan virtues can give us. Western liberal thought
has attempted to be that universal value, but unfortunately has proven
too brittle. In short, it can change some people, but it leaves us
with the push and pull of cosmopolitanism versus community.

---------------------------

So what can be done? well, the answers are already there. The great
religious leap forward is what one might call an "open community."
That is, a community that one can join and leave without
will. Religious are not 
