---
title: Who's Threatening Your Values, Anyway?
category: cutting-floor
---

## So Who Is It That's Threatening Your Values, Anyway?

One thing I write about is the nastiness of partisanship in American
society. I would say that it is responsible for screwing up and
corrupting our politics, but that actually gives partisanship too
_little_ credit. That's because it is also busy screwing up our news,
our relationships, philosophy and discussion of ideas.

Through out all of this, the partisans claim that the reason the
_other side_ is evil and must be shut out of discussions is that "they
don't share our values!!" Indeed, there is often much talk about
Ameria "losing its values." In the entire course of business, "values"
is bandied about as if it is a concrete thing that can easily be
discussed.

Values are abstract - a word we used to denote all _particular_
values. Everyone has values and moral values of another sort. The
problem is which values. However, for some suspicious reason, some
people are averse to indicating exactly which values they think other
people don't share. Instead they retreat to discussions in the
abstract.

*New Rule*: In order to have a meaningful conversation about values,
 _you need to say what those values are_. None of this hiding behind
 shorthand telling us the other side is evil without saying why you
 think they're evil.

As an example, I think that all races are members of one family and
that discussion of race should be informed of an absolute equality of
everyone, no matter their ethnic composition. This is A VALUE, one I
feel so strongly about that my religious beliefs are predicated around
its acceptance. It is something that can be meaningfully discussed. Are
there people who do not believe in this value? Why yes, there
are. This includes so-called "racialists" who think that tested IQ
scores and history mean that African-Americans and Latinos are less
"developed" than Europeans, and therefore should have less of a say in
society. People who evangelize this outlook can rightly be said to be
a threat to my values. Fortunately, these people are either few in
number, though perhaps they may be more numerous, but too craven to
openly espouse their ideas openly to me.

As another value, we might VALUE RELIGION. This, too, is a
value. There are those who have merrily, loudly taken up the "New
Atheist" banner and seek to denigrate even salutory expressions of
this value as misguided nonsense. Such people seem happy to pose as a
"threat to the values of others." Well, that's their bidness; I don't
like it, but if such people value the amusement of their friends and
themselves much more highly than they value the need to have any
influence over the bulk of their fellow citizens, I can't stop
them. But here, at least we have a block of people that can
leigitimately claim to be an "opponent of someone's values."

But unfortunately, lots of people are hesitant to talk about specific
values. Why do you think that is?

A critical part of "getting along with other people" is to always
_assume positive intent_. Misunderstandings happen all the time; when
they do, it is all too easy to think the worst of someone else simply
because the circumstances conspired to make someone look like a fool
or a little bit of a jerk. There is generally no good to be had from
presuming the worst in people.

However, when talking about tendencies an individual has, one can read
a little more into this. And the inability to talk about values except
as as abstract entity says something unflattering in many cases.

In the most part, people are silent because if they were explicit, it
would be far to easy to debunk their claims! For instance, many of the
"racialists" claim that African Americans don't share such values as
"hard work," or "respect for family," "self-restraint" or "respect for
the law." Unfortunately for them, their claims are far too easy to
disprove, both emperically and religiously. However, many people still
find it convenient to agree with these claims, but simply remain
silent, and instead claim the community is troubled because "they
don't have the right values," under the mistaken notion that if you're
vague, other people on the same page will understand where you're
going but people who would otherwise make you look like a fool or
worse will leave you alone.

Many of your self-described "deplorables" are merry to depict the
African American communities as entirely responsible for the hardships
inflicted on them and the situation in inner cities. Let's look at
this realistically. First, the entire argument collapses when you take
into account the fact that most African Americans _do not live in
inner cities_. But about these "inner city" resident's who "don't
share your values" - that's just as easy to prove it's a crock.
Patrick Moynihan long ago outlined how the lack of opportunities for
employment in inner cities due to geographic and social isolation (and
let's not forget the racism that led to this clustering in the inner
cities) led to the collapse of gainful employment and family life, and
led to a number of ill knock-off effects such as the rise in use of
addictive substances and the drug trade. This explanation is accepted
by politicians of virtually all stripes.  These hardships were not due
to a lack of values in the African-American communities; indeed, were
_in spite_ of the values of the community. These sorts of things are
predictable outcomes when you deprive people of employment
opportunities easily afforded to the remainder of society. Let's not
forget that this all happened at a time in America when all you needed
was a job on an assembly line to afford a middle-class job. Are we
really to believe that the members of these inner-city communities
were simply "too lazy" to hop on the gravy train afforded their white
counterparts in the newly expanding suburbs?

Now let's look at the denizens of white rural America. Because paid
employment is down in rural America; drug use is up, and they are
seeing a general collapse in two-parent households and marital
stability. Are these so-called "racialists" now going to start
targeting these people? Will they pull up IQ tests and use them to say
the problem is that they must be from an inferior genetic stock?  If
"inferior values" are the explanations of problems in the inner
cities, certainly these same "inferior values" must be in place in
white rural America. Wouldn't the same dynamic apply here?
Indeed, the Charles Murray racialists seem to think that the values of
the inner cities have somehow spread to rural america, as if it is an
uncontrollable virus carried by gangsta rap music.

This is execrable
nonsense. The actual facts indicate the virtuous things attributed to
"European society" equally equally to African-Americans. Place white
communities under stress, and they behave exactly the same as the
African-American communities (actually, slightly worse, truth be
told).

The reason these arguments arent made out loud isn't due to some
subtle reason that is easy to misunderstand. In fact, it's far more
simple: people know when they hold beliefs that are disagreeable, and
they don't want to embarass themselves. It isn't "political
correctness" that's keeping people from making this argument. It's the
fact they DON'T WANT TO LOSE or LOOK LIKE A JERK. Well, unfortunately,
there's very little line between looking like a jerk and being a
jerk. And if you have uncharitable thoughts about others, don't be
surprised if you get uncharitable thoughts in return.