---
title: Counteracting the Mad Max Trope
---

# Counteracting the _Mad Max_ Trope
I a finishing up a novel right now, Octavia Butler's _Parable of the
Sower_. Science fiction is experiencing something of a rebirth now;
While I was in college in the eighties, it seemed like it was going
into a period of retrenchment, after a decade or so as perhaps the
dominant form of genre fiction. This novel was written in the
nineties, and has since become a classic of that period, when all
sorts of interesting writers were discarding the space opera tropes
that had once defined the genre. If you pick it up now, something
about it seems formulaic - the strong willed adolescent protagonist,
fighting to create a society in a collapsing dystopian
civilization. If that seems a formula, one suspects it's because
this novel helped invent it.

That being said, this novel did have one fatal flaw. I'm not talking
about its dystopian flavor, although that has something to do with
it. (Geeky aside: I know writers like Octavia Butler are a favorite
target of the "Sad Puppies," with whom I have normally little sympathy
except for the fact that I do think too much science fiction is
unnecessarily dark.)

My problem is with a trope that is common to a lot of fiction is
general, which is:

    A collapse of civilization will turn us all into murderous
    bastards.

I'd like to dub this the "Mad Max Trope." To wit: the presumption that
something no worse than an extended as a power outage will result in
the widespread collapse of all vestigates of society and the wholesale
discarding of all forms of morality. In the case of this novel, it is
California as a warlike no-man's land where any vestigate of society
is stripped bare by an endless supply of violent junkies, arsonists
and looters. Think _Mad Max: The Road Warrior_, without all the cool
vehicles.

I think this view is unrealistically cynical. With propaganda and an
armed oppressive regime, it is indeed possible that society can become
murderous. What I have problems with is the idea that it is _natural_;
that is, even without propaganda and state support of violent
militias, that this will happen all as a matter of course the minute
our society falls under the slightest bit of stress.  The problem,
essentially, is one of lack of vision: the writer can envision a peaceful
society thriving in a situation of scarcity, so they suppose people of good
will be so overwhelmed by the morally weak that any semblence of order
will collapse in spite of their best efforts.

Going back to the novel: this trope makes itslef most known in the
plot when our heroine makes here trek up north across
California. Slowly, one by one, she picks up a not-so-merry band of
followers and the group decides to settle in a farmland up
north. Along the way, they run across a steady stream of isolated
travelers, separated families, and small groups of maurauders. The
journey is perilous and dangerous, yet there are people all around
make the same journey. The solution for this lack of safety and
isolation should be obvious to anyone: TRAVEL IN A REALLY FRIGGIN
LARGE GROUP. If lack of trust is a problem, pad it out with extended
cousins and relatives with whom you have at least a modicum of
trust. The heroine's group expanded to over a dozen; are we to believe
they were the only ones for whom it occurred that there is safety in
numbers?

Yes, I know people can be difficult to deal with, but cavemen didn't
roam around in nuclear families. How do you think Homo Sapiens wiped
out every other one of the hundreds of other humanoid species that
competed with them? The tools helped, but homo sapiens sure as heck
didn't traveling in groups of two to four. No, they hunted in groups
that by any means were LARGE - complex societies of over a
hundred. That's the main way homo sapiens was able to leverage its big
brains, and that's why the neanderthals are no longer with us. It's
also why so much of our "megafauna" disappeard tens of thousands of
years ago; once humans started working in groups of hundreds, no other
predator had a chance.

The "Mad Max Trope" will admit none of those lessons of history;
they're too sunny to move the plot along. Instead, it posits that
morality is maladaptive and for weenies, and that under the laws of
nature, all the good, idealistic people will be mercilessly wiped out.
Anyone who more moral and idealistic than the morally ambiguous,
scrappy protagonist is "too good" and will die the miserable anonymous
death of a Start Trek redshirt, either becoming cannon fodder,
starving to death or being stabbed in the back for being too
trusting. The "moral," if you could call it that, is that morality is
a weakness and an encumberance that stops working on your behalf the
second you no longer have street lights and a 4G connection. Lost in
this morbid, commonplace analysis is fact is the fact that moral
people tend to be trustworthy and capable, and that perhaps it might
be useful for selfish reasons for the not-so-moral protagonist to
surround him or herself with such people.

Far from this being an accurate assumption, people thrived (if you
could call it that) in tribal societies, even in times of scarcity.
Emperical evidence shows that people are by default cooperative and
trusting, much more than normally given credit for. The idea
that situations of stress will make people less cooperative is odd;
less sharing and trusting initially, yes. But that is easily fixed
over exposure to someone else's presence.

A collapse in civilization may cause moral regression, but let's not
forget that many of the causes of moral regression are _caused_ by
civilization too. In particular, exposure to mass media, the market
society and cult-like political mass movements led by sociopathic
leaders is especially deleterious, but impossible without modern
civilization.  Today's society incentivizes a bias toward materialism
and individualism. Knock out the props of society and things will get
very bad, but at least you won't have those negative influences to
deal with. The "noble savage" may be the stuff of illusions, but
savages are far more noble than we give them credit for.

----------------------------------

What might more realistically happen? Will things be all puppies and
rainbows? Not even close. I just believe the "Mad Max" scenario is not
the default.

The main problem is that of not of naivety and too much good, but
simply too much evil. One of Octavia Butler's narrative devices is
"pyro," an addictive substance that turns people into murderous
arsonists that do not fear death. This literary device serves to
supply a neverending stream of "evil." In real life, addicts are a
huge problem, but I'm aware of no drug that causes people to become
unthinking zombies bent on distruction. Any such drug would be
self-limiting realistically, since when faced with such a person, your
best bet would be to shoot them on site. Such a drug is going to have
few takers, no matter how appealing.

But the greater point is that one you have your community, you need to
detect and fight those who would bring evil to a community. Once
communities a community is functioning, the problem of evil is
primarily a problem _within_ a community. Problems with other
communities may bring conflict and one community may feel the other
community is evil, but that is not an accurate assessment, no matter
how heartfelt. There is no such thing as a freestanding, stable
community of evil people, just as you could not have an isolated
village where very every person was part of the same organized crime
syndicate. If everyone was evil, they would prey on each other and the
community would collapse, end of story. No, functioning communities by
necessity need most of their people not to be evil. This is why evil
political regimes are also very restrictive and propaganda-based -
because they need a lot of good people to prop up the regime.

So if the main problem is the presence of isloated individuals that
become cancers on the community, this becomes much more
soluble. Certainly, civilization and order has made this less of a
problem. Even the most voluble of critics of police behavior are
willing to concede that fixing police behavior is far preferable to
having no policemen. But societies have functioned without law
enforcement, and can do so again.

In particular, we certainly know a lot more, intellectually, about the
evil - who they are and what makes these indiviauls tick. In
particular, psychology has identified certain individuals as having
the "dark triad" behaviors, sociopathy being one of them. Such people
are the closest one could think of as "evil."  Individuals without
these problems will at worst be evil only in certain contexts,
contexts which generally preclude the worst things things like arson,
murder and the like.  While I don't wish to get into the nature of
evil and its social manifestations - I'll leave that to the
sociologists - my main point is that groups of people throughout
history have leared to keep evil at bay.

Indeed, we have developed instinctual defenses that allow us to detect
evil. The fact that we react so badly to finding out why someone is a
liar in spite of the fact we tell white lies ourselves all the time
may be from evolution, because the one thing the "dark triad"
behaviors have in common is the fact that those inflicted with these
conditions are pathological, uncontrollable liars. There is no
reason to expect that whatever evolutionary defenses we may have had
to detect such individuals will let us down.
