---
title: I'll pass on bitcoin
---

## Bitcoin? Pass.

Some time ago I wrote up a blog post about Bitcoin. It was mainly
negative in nature. I saw a few things that seriously concerned me:

1. It was primarily being used as a "buy-and-hold" commodity instead
of a medium of exchange.

2. It was very inefficient as an exchange protocol, having incredible
transaction costs.

3. It was too slow to serve as an efficient mechanism of exchange.

4. The nonrecourse mechanism makes it generally unsuitable for large
transactions, due to the possibility of fraud.

5. The mechanism through with miners are remunerated have the quality
of a pyramid scheme; that is, they are only able to cover costs so
long as each bitcoin is worth increasingly more. Once the "free money"
runs out, miners will have to cover their costs entirely with transaction
fees. Given the computational cost of clearing just one transaction,
these could be far more expensive than credit cards.

6. Arguments regarding the upcoming fork represented an existential
threat to the system.

I originally wrote a draft of this particular post in June of last
year (2017) but never finished the math up. Since that time, the fork
came and went with little fanfare, and in a completely unpredictable
move, Bitcoin inexplicably rocketed close to $20,000. In spite of a
healthy dip, it is still well above where it started last
year. (Cynics have noted that the real momentum didn't happen until
Thanksgiving in the USA, where poeple exchanged hot tips from their
relatives to get in on the next big thing.) Recently it has dipped and
leveled off, leaving others to think that this is a temporary
correction like others they have seen, and that it is basically a
"hold."

I disagree, and think it could drop a LOT further. Tempted as I
am to "go short," I know that I will time it badly, paying a ton for
my puts (if indeed I can even get those) and get stuck when
illiquidity keeps me from exercising when the whole thing collapses.

There are additional threats to BTC that I now see since I wrote the
draft last June. This was to be a complicated article on how one might
price BTC based on pricing theory. But I've dropped the math.  Present
events make me believe that proper valuation is probably zero. The
main problem is the proliferation of alternate currencies, which
provide superior technical solutions to ecommerce problems. This will
_eventually_ cause bitcoin to collapse due to lack of demand. Without
a compelling use case to distinguish it from alternatives, why would
you buy BTC?

Some have said there is no way to value bitcoin. But this is
nonsense. You can value it base on _the value you get by using bitcoin
for exchange instead of something else_. Perhaps you can
value it in the standard mathematical models of a hedge; e.g. in
exactly the same approach that options were first calculated using
Black-Scholes, and other financial instruments. But lacking good
statistics on demand for actual transactions for economic exchange
(the vast bulk of transactions are to either buy or sell outright), I
gave up on the math, figuring a thought experiment would work just as well.

Let's restate some basic economics. Why are bitcoins in demand? There
are two reasons:
1. Because people wish to hold them temporarily so as to perform
transactions
2. Because people wish to hold them for appreciation in value, _in the
expectation that there will be more need for usage in transactions in
the future_

Bitcoin itself is said to be a mechanism of _exchange_ and a _store_
of value. Why is it a store of value? Because - you can use it for
exchange. The need for exchange *is* why you can use it as a store of
value.  In other words, when you buy bitcoin you are paying to "get in
the game." If you don't intend to use bitcoin to exchange it, then
you're just buying it for the privelege of hopefully selling it to
someone else later. This is known cynically as the "greater fool"
theory (i.e. you're buying it for what seems to be a foolish price in
the hope you can sell it for an even higher, more foolish price). But
most people who busy bitcoin at least claim that there is a real
value, based on anticipated future demand for use in transactions.

Being that transactions are still carried out in a dollar-denominated
manner, the only reason to convert to BTC is the lower cost for the
intermediary. That is, convert to BTC, make the exchange, and convert
back to dollars (or other "fiat" currency), and hopefully save money
and gain speed by going through the intermediary. Is that the case?
Well, years ago when it took pennies to clear a transaction... sure!
Even then, you had a speed problem. Nevertheless, as little as a year
ago, you could clear a transaction for less then a dollar if you were
willing to wait a few hours. But right now? When transaction costs
average $5 with hours of clearing time, a situation which has only
alleviated due to the temporary dip in currency value? With that going
on, there is no demand other than greater fool.

Let's be clear, Bitcoin was a clear innovation: it just isn't working
for its given purpose now that transaction costs and volatility is so
high. Bitcoin was concieved as one of many competing currencies -
competing with "government currency." As such, it must not only work
as a "store of value" - it must also work as well or better than the
other currencies one may come up with! And given the clearing times,
transaction cost, and huge power waste involved with BTC, it is hard
to see this is the case. Several months back I stumbled on a blog post
of someone involved in eitherium claiming that BTC and etherium have
basically "won," and that the exploding growth of altchains and
currencies needed to stop. This is hypocricy - nothing more than
someone talking their book. It is humbug and the worst sort of
self-centered nonsense. Why don't they like the competing currencies?
Because they are now long BTC and Etherium, that's why! Any alternate
currency is competing for cash from speculators. Those who hold
bitcoin with realistic hopes that its value os correct are those that
believe network effects will make it *necessary* for others to
purchase such currency to carry out day-to-day transactions. The only
way that this can happen is if alternate cryptocurrencies suddenly
disappear from the planet. But there are always
alternatives. Meanwhile, suppliers are _dropping_ BTC, not adding its
support.

And given that you can invent a currency out of thin air, why not
invent your own rather than prop up someone else's currency and make
them rich at your expense? You won't. The founders of Ripple are
figuring that out. Banks are pleny interested in their transaction and
payment mechanisms, and quite willing to use them on their own
terms. But XRP? They won't touch it. Why bother, when they can just
set up their own payment scheme without massively paying for a bunch
of "tokens" that can be generated with less than a penny of computing
power?

The question now is if BTC will _hold_ its value, rather than go
up. And here again, I'm doubtful that is the case. It may continue to
stay have value for some time, but with these things the collapse, when
it comes, is sudden, as a slow drawdown inevitably leads to loss of
interest followed one day by a sudden stampede for the doors.

If the case wasn't bad enough already, there are three final reasons
that I think BTC will be unsuccessful. These are reasons that did not
occur to me when I first wrote about it. Some are only now clear.

The first is that transaction costs are as good as they're going to
get. BTC already has a tiered system that where you have to pay a lot
in transaction costs to get transactions cleared in reasonable time
(see link above). Yet most of those transaction costs go to
intermediaries, not miners. The miners are still getting nominal
transaction fees, but mainly expect their mining operations to foot
the bill. By design, those mining operations will pay less over time
while compuational load will continue to increase. Eventually,
government regulations and the shift away from coal will ensure that
even the miners in China will need to take a decent-sized cut to pay
market rates for the enormous computing costs required for the
proof-of-work transactions.

The second is currency risk - the risk the currency will change in
value. BTC is currency risk written large. Why? Because transactions
need to be valued - and in any transaction, _there are two sides to
the deal_. A fluctuating currency will almost, by definition, make it
difficult to conduct business. And as I've pointed out, the business
case for BTC is that it will become increasingly compelling and
necessary over time to conduct transactions in BTC. If BTC continues
to increase in cost, it's a little easier, but the minute BTC drops,
suppliers have to quickly adjust their prices to the upside to ensure
they are not losing money on the deal! Without price stability,
suppliers are going to go to something else.

And finally, there is no efficient, effective way of integrating
bitcoin into ecommerce. There is no open-source framework with a HOWTO
to get you started on integrating it seamlessly for commerce. This is
extremely telling - what that means is that support of BTC hasn't
become compelling enough for anyone to solve it in the base case! It's
as if the core use case, the carrying out of day-to-day transactions,
isn't even something the BTC community cares about. Now, I have
numerous HOWTOs and books on how it works in theory and how to get
"involved" in the community, how to "load your wallet" and "invest in
the future." Yet I have not yet seen a book on frameworks for easily
facilitating transactions. The lack of such a focus would seem to mean
that bitcoins are not solving a problem that developers have - or even
business has. Were the community truly serious about using bitcoin for
COMMERCE, this would be the significant problem. The goal should be to
make this as easy to use as Stripe. Yet, with all this hoopla over
cryptocurrency, the closes thing we have to Stripe is.... Stripe.

And the answer to these three problems from the BTC community?
Crickets.  Why is this not a concern to the BTC community? Because all
protests to the side, BTC is no longer about creating a working,
low-cost ecommerce market place. They no longer have an incentive to
do so. The BTC is incentivized around one thing:_making bitcoin price
go up_. Perhaps the technical minds that could resolve this *do* feel
it is a concern and have been too preoccupied with various forks and
controversies" to pay attention to this. But my guess is that, even
one these issues are settled, there will be no focus on lowering
transaction costs or currency control measures to force a modicum of
price stability. Instead, the focus will turn
toward other measures meant to encourage buy-and-hold strategies meant
to inflate the value of BTC.

At this point, it appears to be a multi-level marketing ploy; a
pyramid scheme built on selling others an inferior product. As much as
it's backers may object to this characterization, they should ponder
the fact that most of its backers sound a lot more like investors at
the bottom rungs of a multi-level marketing scheme than they do commercial
middlemen. Both opportunities can be potentially lucrative; only one
of them requires you to evangelize a "buy-and-hold" investment
mentality to the greater community. When its backers use phrases like
"Keep the faith!" in their email .sigs and boasts that they are
"HOLDR"s, one realizes this is not a serious business concern. It is a
dressed-up multilevel marketing ploy masquerading as a business
opportunity.
