---
title: Liberty: An Assessment
category: in-progress
---
Last year (2017) in response to a Wilmette Institute course in
Philosophy, I put together a paper as a final project. With the
encouragement of one of the instructors, I was urged to make an actual
paper submission of it. So I went through the channels and did initial
reviews.

To make a long story short, this did not happen. It had turned out
that I had missed some critical sources, necessitating a
rewrite. After the rewrite, I had to admit to myself that this was not
anything terribly important - certainly not enough to go through the
ordinary review process or submission. With other projects beckoning,
I pulled the plug on this one.

One good thing about a blog is it allows me to present this to others
who are interested without making any unnecessary claim to
attention. So I'm presenting here, something of the product of
individual scholarship. Make of it what you will - or won't.

# Liberty: An Assessment

### Abstract:

*One of the foundational assumptions of “Western” democratic societies
is the central importance of liberalism, a philosophy of
noninterference that explains the centrality of liberty in public
discourse. The deference given to liberty is in spite of well-known
difficulties balancing how much liberty to grant or guarantee and in
what circumstances. This article will show that the Bahá’í concept of
government and society, rather than glorifying liberty in general,
holds a few specific freedoms important and otherwise holds other
concerns more important. In changing the balance of which freedoms to
be guaranteed and which to be limited, the Baha’i Faith offers a
redefinition to the accepted framework of democratic
liberalism. Central features held necessary include basic guarantees
of freedom of conscious and freedom of independent investigation,
guarantees of an informed, educated citizenry with well-developed
virtues, and a leadership accountable for just government of the
citizenry and rule of law. When these elements are present, many of
the other liberties granted by classical liberalism emerge naturally,
without requiring structural tradeoffs.*

-------------------------------------
 
One of the fruits of living in modern liberal democratic societies is
the healthy dose of liberties provided to all its denizens, at least
in theory (1). Some may object that there is much more to go: one may
reasonably say that in practice what one is at liberty to do very much
depends on one’s material station in life and that liberties are not
even across society; one may rightly complain about abuse of civil
rights in minority neighborhoods; one could even object to excess
government interference in the free marketplace, and so forth. But in
general, those fortunate enough to live in “Western” democracies have
a great amount of liberty and freedom, even when compared to as little
as two hundred years ago (2). This is due to government acceptance of
the philosophy of liberalism, a philosophy that holds regards liberty
and non-interference with certain activities in the public and private
sphere as being important. The benefits granted to citizens of
governments under this philosophy are many, particular compared to
medieval days of yore: kings do not seize property and daughters; one
can operate a printing press without permission; if one is in a
religious minority, the government will not interfere or apply
pressure in matters of faith; one can generally establish a business
without the need to be related to someone in the government, and so
on. Generally this is acknowledged as a good thing.  So it is a bit
odd to read the Bahá’í writings and come across something like this:

    Know ye that the embodiment of liberty and its symbol is the
    animal. That which beseemeth man is submission unto such
    restraints as will protect him from his own ignorance, and guard
    him against the harm of the mischief-maker. Liberty causeth man to
    overstep the bounds of propriety, and to infringe on the dignity
    of his station. (Kitáb-i-Aqdas 63)

To borrow an old colloquialism: “Say what?”. If this was one of the
first things a reader in the United States reader found when the
Bahá’í Writings, the reader would find it very odd and maybe back off
in his or her investigations. Those who had read more of the Writings
might have found it odder; after all, there isn't much in the Bahá’í
writings that seem to back up the normal illiberal or conservative
tropes that often accompany attacks on liberty: no paens to strong
leadership, military glory, loyalty to nation or nostalgic invocations
of golden eras of the past. But here, in the central repository of
Baha’i laws, there is an extended passage against liberty. What
explains this?

There seem to be two reasonable ways to view this quote. The first
view looks at its context within the Kitáb-i-Aqdas. For those who are
new to the Bahá’í Faith, the Kitáb-i-Aqdas is the primary repository
for the religious laws of the Bahá’í Faith, describing the
restrictions in behavior that Bahá’ís should choose to follow. So it
is no surprise to see a passage urging followers to curtail their own
liberties. However, it seems there is more to the story than just this
context. Here is an additional quote from the same passage:

    “We see some men desiring liberty and priding themselves
    therein. Such men are in the depths of ignorance.”

This passage and others indicates that on
balance, Bahá’u’lláh had a problem with liberty as a presumed absolute
ideal in society.

There are many writings regarding liberty as an ideal in the Bahá’í
Faith: some speak of liberty in negative terms; others speak of
liberty in positive terms. On balance, the philosophy of the Bahá’í
Faith has a nuanced view of liberty and to what extent it should be
granted. This is a contrast with many democratic societies, which hold
liberty as a paramount value. This is held to such an extent that
citizens tend to adopt this view for themselves, and it is one that
Bahá’ís may pick up unconsciously as well. This paper discusses
important refinements to the place of liberty as applied in society,
as proposed in the Bahá’í writings.

The scope of liberty is a vast one; as a result, it is necessary to
make an important distinction to limit the scope of this analysis:

• Conceptions of liberty as guaranteed by governments and
 organizations, as well as informally between people and groups of
 people (“political” liberty).
 
• Liberty to act freely in accordance with one’s goals and purpose
 without manipulation by social pressure or subconscious desires;
 e.g. ability to use ones free will to make proper decisions
 (“personal” liberty).

This writing will only concern itself with “political” liberty as
distinguished in the first item. Specifically, it will concentrate on
liberty as understood in the philosophy of liberalism, a bedrock of
Western democratic societies throughout much of the world. The subject
of “personal” liberty is a vast subject that is addressed at length by
Bahá’í writings, writings of all the major religions, and by esteemed
secular authors (3). When Baha’u’llah says “true Liberty consists of
adherence to My commands,” this personal liberty is what is
meant. Important as it is, this form of liberty is not the subject of
this paper. In many cases the distinction between personal and
political liberty is difficult to make because this distinction is
rarely made explicitly by writers, but this distinction is important
for this analysis.

This writing proceeds as follows. First, it surveys current strains of
thought regarding the importance of liberty in two philosophies of
governance: _liberalism_, and stronger variants such as
_libertarianism_. Problems with these ideals are examined, both from a
Bahá’í viewpoint and a practical, more secular viewpoint. Finally, it
will show that Bahá’í Faith proposes elevating mainly certain specific
liberties; these foundational rights are what liberties the Bahá’í
Faith finds to be important. These rights are generally also granted
within liberal societies; although not emphasized, there is much
greater unity of thought about these rights both inside and outside
the Faith. These rights form the outline of a Bahá’í alternative to
existing conceptions of liberty as defined by liberalism.

## LIBERTY UNDER THE WESTERN LIBERAL TRADITION

The problems presented by untrammeled liberty are almost universally
recognized among philosophers in discussions of liberty. Yet such
crucial limitations are elided in most discussions of liberty in
Western society because of the unquestioned cultural importance of
liberty. This importance exists because respect for liberty is a
bedrock of liberalism, the philosophical view supporting most
“Western” democracies. One aim of liberalism is to maximize the
freedoms available to government citizens, particularly in the
economic and civic sphere, while limiting unjust abuses of
liberty. Frequently, liberalism takes the form of certain “rights”
being formalized and made available to citizens. In practice, none of
these rights are absolute; e.g. shouting “Fire!” in a crowded theatre
is not protected speech in an liberal democracy. Nonetheless, this
assumption is so central to the Western world view as to manifest
itself as an unquestioned basis for all ideals of good governance.
 
Proper consideration of Bahá’í ideals requires taking these
assumptions and questioning them much as one would any other
historical alternative for governance (4). To unpack liberty as the
Western reader normally thinks of it, a set of glorious assumptions
about the joys of unfettered freedom, a quick glance at the Wikipedia
entry on “Liberty” and the various definitions of liberty as set forth
by philosophers is sufficient to illustrate the complexities and
tradeoffs. As an example, consider two distinct viewpoints on
liberty. Here is one from great early-Enlightenment-era philosopher
Thomas Hobbes:

    A free man is he that in those things which by his strength and
    wit he is able to do is not hindered to do what he hath the will
    to do. (Leviathan, Part 2, Ch. XXI).

This is a rather wide-ranging definition of liberty. Certainly, few
would sign up for a government that guaranteed this sort of liberty,
which would seem to grant the right to oppress and be
oppressed. Government, by definition, exists partly to guard its
citizens against those who would harm other people by doing "what he
hath the will to do." This sort of thing is exactly why Hobbes
proposed his Leviathan . The view of Liberty as an absolute ideal in
social norms is clearly ridiculed by Baha’u’llah, and he clearly seems
to be referring to this view when he insists that “embodiment of
liberty and its symbol is the animal.”

Later philosophers, who regarded Liberty as an ideal, wished to frame
it positively and generally acknowledge such tradeoffs. Thomas Locke
provides an alternate viewpoint in this example:

    The natural liberty of man is to be free from any superior power
    on earth, and not to be under the will or legislative authority of
    man, but to have only the law of nature for his rule. The liberty
    of man, in society, is to be under no other legislative power, but
    that established, by consent, in the commonwealth; nor under the
    dominion of any will, or restraint of any law, but what that
    legislative shall enact, according to the trust put in it. Freedom
    then is not what Sir Robert Filmer tells us, “a liberty for every
    one to do what he lists, to live as he pleases, and not to be tied
    by any laws…” (Second Treatise on Government IV sec. 22)

It should be noted that in many talks, ‘Abdu’l-Baha praises concepts
such as Freedom and Liberty. Where he does, it is evident he is
talking about this sort of liberty, one that seeks to guarantee not
absolute liberty, but grants of liberty that prevent unjust
limitations and usurpations by authorities.

Before further discussing the Bahá’í response to such views, it is
necessary to give a brief overview of the major schools of thought in
Western philosophy. The following cursory recap has been included at
the risk of boring readers who are already aware of this.

### Survey of Secular Writers on Liberty and Liberalism

The outlines of liberal thought can be traced back to the classical
Greek philosophers and up through the writings of medieval
philosophers. Important backing for this philosophy developed in the
medieval ideal of *imago dei*, a presumption that all humans are
created in the image and likeness of God and therefore have equal
rights. In spite of this extensive philosophical history, an
elaboration of the philosophy of liberalism did not occur until the
17th century, with the writings of John Locke. While his conception
did not place liberty as such as the motivation behind his philosophy,
his use of natural rights as a device has had an enormous influence on
views of liberty in the West. John Locke argued that all humans had
certain natural rights, including the right to “liberty,” and that
just governments must not violate these. Liberalism as imagined did
not only prescribe a certain viewpoint toward liberty; it was also an
individualistic philosophy, and much of what distinguishes the
“Western” version of democracy is the emphasis on both liberty and
individualism. Followers of John Locke continued to expand on his
ideals in the political realm, and liberalism as a force received a
strong impetus from the American Revolution.

Later philosophers expanded on liberalism as a philosophy; examples
include Jean-Jacques Rousseau, who sought to elevate freedom under the
social contract of governance as a moral imperative. Additional
impetus was provided by the French revolution, along with early
utopian and anarchist movements, represented by philosophers such as
Josiah Warren. However, the first successful philosophy conceiving of
liberty as central was put forth by nineteenth century philosopher
John Stuart Mill. His writing _On Libety_ was perhaps the most serious
argument for liberty as an animating ideal for society, and comes close
to taking a maximalist position to liberty – allowing that neither
government nor society may prevent someone from doing as he or she
wishes, so long as no one else is harmed. This intuitively appealing
concept is obviously complicated by that crucial qualification at the
end. Such a philosophy would seem to be such that two different
people, given the same definition, would come up with wildly different
interpretations for what would be permissible behavior. Still, his
humanistic writings make for a persuasive point of view, and they
remain among the most influential on the subject of liberty.

From that point forward, further philosophical movements extended the
defense of liberty to the point of its maximization at the cost of
other things. The first modernist manifestation of this thought may be
in the writings of Nietzsche in the late nineteenth century, who may
have been the first successful “modernist” to aggressively question
the basis of authority of any form; in parallel with this, various
anarchist movements continued to develop through the First World
War. Nowadays, the most influential of these movements are
self-identified as libertarians. The philosophical proponents of
libertarianism are generally materialists; significant writers include
Friedrich Hayek, Murray Rothbard and Ayn Rand, its most significant
popularizer. These writers were reacting to the abuses of Stalinism
and other forms of central planning, and its proponents have valid
points about the dangers of overcentralization and government
control. However, at its worst, the philosophy manifests itself as a
political movement aiming to defend the prerogatives of those who have
managed to accumulate large masses of money and commercial power
against any governmental effort to curb abuses (5).

The vast majority of serious philosophers, even those strongly
supporting the various schools of liberalism, do not follow the
maximalist positions describe above. Instead, they have sought to
maximize liberty as much as practical in certain areas, but with the
view toward protecting freedoms while restricting its abuses. There
are too many other views of liberty to elaborate; frequently,
philosophies may regard liberty as a secondary consideration may
characterize the importance of liberty in a certain way, insofar as it
supports other elements more important to the philosophy. For
instance, Rawlsian theories of “justice” would guarantee liberty
within that context; Socialist/Marxist theories instead regard the
primary liberty as the ability to produce one’s works in the absence
of “alienation” from the products of one’s own labor and work
backwards from there; other secular philosophers have proposed
“positive” liberties as a balance to the “negative liberties”
guaranteed by liberalism. Meanwhile, more conservative views may
choose to narrowly regard liberty as simply freedom from domination by
another, which would rule out slavery and exploititative relationships
such as serfism, but leave a host of other liberties undefined.

Presently liberalism remains the dominant philosophy, not only
regarding attitudes on liberty, but as the animating philosophy of
most governments in the developed world. Critiques primarily come from
self-identified conservatives (6). Unfortunately, there is no single
conservative critique of liberalism, just as there is no one
conservative ideal, as conservatism is not so much one philosophy as
an attitude towards liberalism and change. A conservative is one who
prefers keeping the historic order of things; as such, the term
“conservative” can mean wildly different beliefs from society to
society. In spite of this, there are common strains among conservatism
of all sort, such as a respect for patriarchy and hierarchy, deference
to traditional and religious authorities, preference of “in-groups”
said to be representative of the culture and defense of traditional
class structures, including aristocracies and other rigid class
structures. There is no globally valid conservative argument against
liberalism, simply because conservatism is, by definition, tied to the
parochial nature of the particular values it seeks to defend. While
certain particular elements of the Baha’i Faith may seem conservative
to outsiders, the Baha’i critique of liberalism is entirely different
in nature to the conservative critique and are rarely informed by
these points; notably, there is no “Golden Age” to preserve in Baha’i
cosmology.

### Problem with Accepted Outlooks on Liberty

In the United States, the accepted attitude on liberty is that of
liberalism, with some acceptance of the stronger libertarian point of
view. There are a number of problems with both. They not only present
conflicts with the Bahá’í viewpoint, but in practical ways having
nothing to do with religious views. The Bahá’í writings have their own
idea of what is defensible as far as liberties, but before discussing
how it would seek to modify liberalism, it is important to understand
why an alternative to liberalism is even necessary.

We can quickly dispense with the maximalist view of liberty as
unsuitable, due both to obvious conflict with Bahá’í writings and
practical considerations. The philosophy has found many adherents
among the affluent, due to its materialist world view and eschewing of
traditional standards of morality. The ubiquity of this world view is
alluded to in Century of Light. The appeal of this view is shown by
the fact that many United States citizens self-identify as
“libertarians,” in spite of having beliefs which are at considerable
variance from actual libertarian beliefs (7). While Bahá’ís are urged
“not to view with too critical an eye the sayings and writings of men”
(Gleanings p. 329), it must be recognized that any philosophy which
seeks to maximize unfettered liberties is much at odds with the
Bahá’í Faith. Baha’u’llah’s assessment in the Kitab-i-Aqdas is
resolute: “We behold men seeking liberty and priding themselves
therein. Such men are in the depths of ignorance.” As far as practical
problems, it is sufficient to note that to date, there has been no
successful instance of a stable government based upon philosophies
such as libertarianism or anarchism. Some commenters have suggested
that the present situation in Somalia in which citizens vie for the
protection of competing warlords presents just such an example; one
hopes they are in jest.

As contrasted with libertarianism, liberalism holds liberty as of
primary but not exclusive importance. Having a more balanced view, it
does not present such obvious conflicts with Bahá’í thought. However,
it is not correct to view them liberalism as being complete
conformance with Bahá’í thought either. For one, in spite of the
success of its outlook, this viewpoint is not the one espoused in the
Bahá’í writings for governance of the Bahá’í communities. The most
comprehensive treatment of this subject is the Universal House of
Justice 1988 letter on “Individual Rights and Freedoms.” The opening
of this statement alludes to a conflict between the two:

    “On the one hand, [certain believers] acknowledge their belief in
    Bahá’u’lláh and His teachings; on the other, they invoke Western
    liberal democratic practices when actions of Bahá’í institutions
    or of some of their fellow Bahá’ís do not accord with their
    expectations” (IRF 367).

The mere statement implies there is a conflict, and the remainder of
the statement is an exploration of this conflict. However, the same
statement notes that there is much in common between the Baha’i and
liberal outlook:

    “Freedom is indeed essential to all expressions of human
     life. Freedom of thought, freedom of expression, freedom of
     action are among the freedoms which have received the ardent
     attention of social thinkers across the centuries. The resulting
     outflow of such profound thought has exerted a tremendous
     liberating influence in the shaping of modern society” (IRF 371).

But neither is it in complete accordance:

    “For so fluid and elastic are its qualities of application and
    expression that the concept of freedom in any given situation is
    likely to assume a different latitude from one mind to another;
    these qualities are, alas, susceptible to the employment alike of
    good and evil… Since any constructive view of freedom implies
    limits, further questions are inevitable…” (IRF 372).

Significantly, the Bahá’í Faith calls for liberty and freedom
as one, but only one, important consideration:

    “Because human beings have been created to ‘carry forward an
    ever-advancing civilization,’ the exercise of freedom, it may be
    deduced, is intended to enable all to fulfill this purpose in
    their individual lives and in their collective functioning as a
    society. Hence whatever in principle is required to realize this
    purpose gauges the latitudes or limits of freedom” (IRF 373).

There are also practical problems with liberalism as a governing
philosophy, irrespective of what the Bahá’í Faith teaches. To begin
with, there is precious little unity on what liberties must be
guaranteed. The dominance of John Locke’s framework for liberalism in
the Western democratic tradition hides the fact that there is no set
of liberties appearing in all philosophies, eastern and western, that
seem universal. Should one consider that be too much to ask, one
should note that that there are other universals that do exist through
most cultures; e.g. certain common moral commandments that appear in
all societies and recognition of certain moral virtues. To take a
minor but vivid example, in the United States, large segments of the
population insist that it is vitally necessary to allow people to arm
themselves with deadly force to ensure a just government. Defenders of
this viewpoint are oblivious to the fact that there are plenty of
functioning liberal democracies which guarantee no such right;
objectors to this viewpoint are meanwhile oblivious to the fact there
are other functional democracies with similarly armed populations
without the correspondingly high levels of firearm-related violence in
the United States. Similar debates occur over what sort of speech and
expression should be protected, right of migration, right of mass
assembly, right to education and a whole host of other issues. The
lack of unity of thought is masked by the fact that everyone seems to
want “liberty,” provided they gets to define what liberty means.

Why did John Locke’s conceptualization of liberty under liberalism
dominate?  The answer lies in the motivation for defining these
liberties: while libertarian philosophy tends to raise liberty as an
unqualified ideal, liberal societies instead elevated a set of
liberties as correctives to demonstrated abuse by authorities. The
Univeral House of Justice say as much: “The very philosophies which
have provided the intellectual content of such revolutions — Hobbes,
Locke, Jefferson, Mill, come readily to mind — were inspired by
protest against the oppressive conditions which revolutions were
intended to remedy” (IRF p375). The enlightenment-era liberties are
certainly a reaction to some extent of the ecclesiastical and feudal
abuses of the European middle ages, just as other liberties have been
minted as a response to other abuses. The reactive nature of some of
these liberties is seen in The Bill of Rights in the United States
Constitution; for instance, it has an unusually specific amendment
prohibiting the government from requiring the garrisoning of troops,
which stemmed from an unjust imposition during British rule. While
many of the rights minted in this manner have led to freedoms we all
enjoy, this is no way to achieve a unified vision of political
liberties to be shared by all.

Another practical limitation is that any liberty granted to excess
will lead to abuse. Unfortunately, this means freedoms and liberties
are things to be optimized, not maximized. This is not something
society is not good at. People are great at maximizing things -
obviously, the more, the better. However, it is much more difficult to
optimize something involving a fragile balance of tradeoffs. This gets
worse when considered across a representative democracy, in which
people vote for other representatives to make these decisions. The
bulk of said voters are working with imperfect information and
seriously impacted by well-documented cognitive errors and
biases. Even if there were unity of thought as to what liberties must
be maintained, it would be difficult. Tax revenues? Too little and
government is unable to carry out necessary functions; too much and
economic growth is slowed and levies are seen as excessive and
resented. Pollution controls? Too little and one leave others to
unjustly ruin the commons and make life harder for future generations;
too much, and one creates inefficiencies in production that increase
pollution on balance. How many voters think along these terms? Does
the fair reader even think along these terms?

Finally, in spite of the benefits of liberalism, it has led to
problems of unhealthy civic attitude. The statement “Individual Rights
and Freedoms” alludes to “the inordinate skepticism regarding
authority, and consequently, in the grudging respect which the
citizens of various nations show toward their governments” (IRF
375). Meanwhile, excessive skepticism toward legitimate authorities
has resulted in anti-intellectualism and even the propagation of
unscientific beliefs of manifest falsity (8).

Proper application of liberties and freedoms is a complicated
question. The Bahá’í Faith obviously has its own specific viewpoint,
but even in the secular realm, the nature of liberty and the problems
of liberalism are subject to the sort of intense questioning that
sociologists, political scientists, and political philosophers can and
do perform. Unfortunately, these critiques are rarely sounded in the
popular press where they could be heard by the average citizen. As a
result, the only objections are typically heard from conservative
critics, whose problems have been discussed earlier in this paper. The
last time this author heard any sort of novel popular rethinking of
the problem of liberties was work by Amatai Etzioni’s and others
proposing “Communitarianism” an alternative to individualistic
liberalism. It produced a flurry of interest in the 1990s, but the
current obscurity of this movement says much about contemporary
attitudes on liberty.

It seems that by the end of the 20th century, many had concluded that
the framework of western liberalism was the natural end-state for
governments around the world, as evidenced by the “End of History”
narratives that reigned shortly after the collapse of the East
Bloc. Much of the current political unrest stems from a lack of
suitable alternatives to the current liberal framework, in the same
way that the vacuum of ideas that emerged shortly after the First
World gave space for odious movements of nationalism and
racism. Current events tragically demonstrate that when citizens
cannot make such liberal democracies work for them, their first
impulse is to infringe on the liberties of others (particularly
minority groups), rather than rethink their underlying assumptions.

The only reasonable conclusion is that much as one may like liberty,
making it the primary concern in discussions on governance of
individuals and society is wrongheaded. And at least in the political
arena, its only competitors are backwards-looking conservatism and
tribal movements seeking narrow group advantage. Meanwhile, there is
far more unity on other aspects a positive society should have, such
as the need for justice and the need for efficient
administration. Bartering away such qualities in exchange for
liberties that may only benefit some seems a particularly unsuitable
tradeoff.

Perhaps the only solution is to figure what these grants of liberty
seek to guarantee, and work from that to figure what liberties to
grant – using it as a means to an end, rather than an end in
itself. To do this, one must think about under what conditions liberty
is recommended as a means for improving the happiness and lot of
humanity. Fortunately, the Bahá’í Writings have much to say about
this. This analysis, which draws upon the Bahá’í writings, will take
the remainder of this writing.  

## A BAHÁ’Í ALTERNATIVE TO ACCEPTED FRAMING OF LIBERTY

The Bahá’í Faith does not ignore Liberty as an ideal – it simply
wishes to place it in the proper context. Analysis of the Bahá’í
Writings spells out their own set of liberties that they hold
important. In this paper, they are termed “foundational liberties” for
convenience of reference through the remainder of this article. They
are felt important due to the explicit import given them by the
writings and the fact that the protection of these liberties will act
to optimize the quality of society, and lead to the protection of
other liberties. This shifts the primary focus of discussions of
government: from how to balance liberty in the very broad sense, to
how best to maximize a handful of specific freedoms in service to a
better society. It will also be shown that without them, other forms
of liberties cannot be safeguarded to citizens. A positive side-effect
is to note that in this formulation, the structure of the government
becomes a secondary consideration for the quality of society,
eliminating a frequent source of contention.

Something else must be set in context before continuing this
discussion: if in fact liberalism has these flaws, while the Baha’i
model of governance is claimed as ideal, why has liberalism been so
successful to this date? Why, when comparing the Baha’i model of
governance against the western democratic model, is it not obvious
which is to be preferred? This is a valid argument. From a Baha’i
viewpoint, governments based on liberalism supports many of the
freedoms that the Baha’i writings call for, so the relative success of
the liberal enterprise should be credited to that. In any event, this
fact should not be a surprise, given that it was religious beliefs
that gave rise to the liberal project in the seventeenth century. To
Baha’is, critics calling for the Baha’i administration to be brought
in conformance with common tenants of liberal democracies have it
backwards – the Baha’i faith is not successful because it reflects
much of the ideals of liberalism; rather, liberalism has been
successful only insofar as it has reflected the ideals of the Baha’i
faith. In any event, from the point of view of confirmed Baha'is,
bringing the tenets of liberal democracy in line with the Baha’i
writings can only but improve said democracies.

What the Bahá’í Faith thinks about liberty is succinctly stated by
Bahá’u’lláhs summary statement in the Kitáb-i-Aqdas: "We approve of
liberty in certain circumstances, and refuse to sanction it in others"
(Kitáb-i-Aqdas 63). Those forms of liberty that are approved are
different than those in Western society - more restrictive in some
areas but more expansive in others. As one might guess, those
liberties that are guaranteed are those that are in line with the
purpose of the Bahá’í revelation: the spiritual development of
humankind, and the development and flourishing of society and
civilization. This will be analyzed in two sections: liberties that
are maintained for the good of an individual's spiritual growth, and
liberties that are maintained for the health of society at large.

### Guarantees of Liberty Important for Individuals

First, there is an important caveat when discussing liberty and
spiritual development. This section will show that certain liberties
must be granted individuals to assist in their spiritual
development. However, the writings do not assert that lack of liberty
itself is an unsurmountable problem for spiritual development. On the
contrary, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá gives the following example:

    Freedom is not a matter of place. It is a condition. I was
    thankful for the prison, and the lack of liberty was very pleasing
    to me, for those days were passed in the path of service, under
    the utmost difficulties and trials, bearing fruits and results.

    Unless one accepts dire vicissitudes, he will not attain. To me
    prison is freedom, troubles rest me, death is life, and to be
    despised is honour. Therefore, I was happy all that time in
    prison.

    (‘Abdu’l-Bahá in London, Interview of September 23, 1911)

Perhaps even more importantly, Baha'u'lah himself indicates in the
prior referenced quote that certain liberties, rather than fostering
spiritual development, may inhibit it.

Other than that caveat, there is nothing in the writings that
recommend lack of liberty particularly. Are there particular liberties
that the Bahá’í Faith does claim must be guaranteed to everyone? The
primary liberty that must be granted, without conditions, would seem
to be that of freedom of conscience:

    … the conscience of man is sacred and to be respected; and that
    liberty thereof produces widening of ideas, amendment of morals,
    improvement of conduct, disclosure of the secrets of creation, and
    manifestation of the hidden verities of the contingent
    world. Moreover, if interrogation of conscience, which is one of
    the private possessions of the heart and the soul, take place in
    this world, what further recompense remains for man in the court
    of divine justice at the day of general resurrection? Convictions
    and ideas are within the scope of the comprehension of the King of
    kings, not of kings; and soul and conscience are between the
    fingers of control of the Lord of hearts, not of [His]
    servants. (A Traveller's Narrative, 60/69)

Indeed, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá says the defense of this freedom of conscience is
one of the primary duties of government:

    [To insure] freedom of conscience
    and tranquility of heart and soul is one of the duties and functions
 of government, and is in all ages the cause of progress in
 development and ascendency over other lands. (A Traveller's
 Narrative, 58/69)

Defense of this liberty would seem to be paramount in ensuring
everyone's spiritual development. This would obviously guarantee the
liberty to declare oneself Bahá’í, and even to leave or later rejoin
it. This freedom of conscience is essentially a private matter.

‘Abdu’l-Bahá explains this guarantee in a passage quoted in a letter
from the Universal House of Justice: "In the religion of God, there is
freedom of thought because God, alone, controls the human conscience"
(UHJ Letter of February 8 1998). However, this freedom of conscious
does not alone guarantee the right to perform certain actions; on the
contrary, the same passage later indicates:

    "… but this freedom should not go beyond courtesy. In the religion
    of God, there is no freedom of action outside the law of God. Man
    may not transgress this law, even though no harm is inflicted on
    one's neighbour. This is because the purpose of Divine law is the
    education of all -- others as well as oneself -- and, in the sight
    of God, the harm done to one individual or to his neighbour is the
    same and is reprehensible in both cases."

As such, under Bahá’í law, the guarantee of a freedom of conscience
does not automatically translate into freedom of free speech and
direct action.

Similarly to the premium on freedom of conscience is the
importance of the independent investigation of truth.

    The first is the independent investigation of truth; for blind
    imitation of the past will stunt the mind. But once every soul
    inquireth into truth, society will be freed from the darkness of
    continually repeating the past. (Selections from the Writings of
    ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, 202.8)

Similar quotes affirm this throughout ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's writings. A
collection of notes on his talks collected by early believer Elizabeth
Fraser Chamberlain indicates the importance this principal was given:
 
    1. INDEPENDENT INVESTIGATION OF REALITY Discover for yourselves
    the reality of things, and strive to assimilate the methods by
    which noble-mindedness and glory are attained among the nations
    and people of the world.  No man should follow blindly his
    ancestors and forefathers. Nay, each must see with his own eyes,
    hear with his own ears and investigate independently in order that
    he may find the truth. The religion of forefathers and ancestors
    is based upon blind imitation. Man should investigate reality.

    (Divine Philosophy 26)

Skeptics may object to this early formulation of Bahá’í Principles by
‘Abdu’l-Bahá, saying that the importance of the “independent
investigation of truth” is an innovation for Westerners without an
overt parallel in Bahá’u’lláh's writings. However, this is an accurate
reformulation of numerous statements of Bahá’u’lláh in which he warns
against blind imitation of one's forefathers, as in the following
(italics added for emphasis):

    It is incumbent on these servants that they cleanse the heart --
    which is the wellspring of divine treasures -- from every marking,
    and that they _turn away from imitation_, which is following the
    traces of their forefathers and sires, and shut the door of
    friendliness and enmity upon all the people of the earth. (Seven
    Valleys 5)

Such appeals urge readers to investigate on their own without taking
into account established opinions – essentially, independent
investigation of truth.

Likewise, in the Kitáb-i-Aqdas, there is an abrogation of a law
prescribing the destruction of certain books (Kitáb-i-Aqdas 48, 159,
214). While the letter of the law here is extremely narrow, and the
Kitáb-i-Aqdas does not say anything about barring censorship,
guaranteeing freedom of the press, or the like, it is more reflective
of the attitude that people should be generally allowed to investigate
things on their own without being guided by authorities. One may well
imagine that some degree of freedom of the press is required, if only
to assist with the independent investigation of truth.

The writings elevate other rights that are sometimes taken for granted
in modern society. One such right is _access to education_ – even
“higher education.” This is notable both because many smaller
religious sects place restrictions on higher education, while the
Bahá’í Faith places no _practical_ restrictions placed on study. Note
that the admonition to avoid studies that "begin with words and end
with words" applies to the sorts of meaningless pseudoscientific
religious discourse common in Bahá’u’lláh's society which is rarely
the stuff of higher education nowadays. One suspects that much of the
reason the Bahá’í Community has so strongly objected to the
restrictions on upper education to the Iranian Bahá’í Community has
much to do with the way in which educational restrictions limit one's
independent investigation of truth and spiritual development. Bahá’í
law regards education as a fundamental family obligation. Indeed,
‘Abdu’l-Bahá has stated in a tablet that if it is not possible to pay
for the education of both girls and boys, one must educate for girls
(Kitáb-i-Aqdas 199-200). In practice, this is tantamount to forcing
universal education, as few people will seek to save money by keeping
their boys uneducated.

This framing of education as an individual right is significant when
contrasted against the Western framing. In Western societies, public
education is generally framed as a social need - society needs a
broadly educated citizenry in order to safeguard the needs of a
democracy and create a productive workforce. In the Bahá’í Faith, on
the other hand, education is a spiritual birthright of individuals -
education is necessary for the independent investigation of truth,
which is necessary for spiritual development. This makes it a more
powerful mandate. Taken to this extent, this not only guarantees the
need for an informed citizenry, but the need to educate every single
individual in society; it is not a grant only to those lucky enough to
have been born with a predetermined inclination for abstract thought
and logical arguments. From an economic viewpoint, it is easy to
triage away a certain part of the population as impractical or
difficult to educate; this would not be the Baha’i view.

One must also mention an important aspect of liberty is something that
has not been written down in the Bahá’í Faith but is clear from the
stewardship through both Abdu’l-Baha and Shoghi Effendi. Authorities
are urged that where possible, decision-making must be left to an
individual's private conscience. This is because it is a necessary
step in the maturation of Humankind, and likewise a duty of the
exercise of conscience that is imposed on every believer. This writing
from the Universal House of Justice gives some explanation of this
(emphasis added):

    …it should be noted that in most areas of human behaviour there
    are acts which are clearly contrary to the law of God and others
    which are clearly approved or permissible; between these there is
    often a grey area where it is not immediately apparent what should
    be done. It has been a human tendency to wish to eliminate these
    grey areas so that every aspect of life is clearly prescribed. A
    result of this tendency has been the tremendous accretion of
    interpretation and subsidiary legislation which has smothered the
    spirit of certain of the older religions. In the Bahá'í Faith
    moderation, which is so strongly upheld by Bahá'u'lláh, is applied
    here also. Provision is made for supplementary legislation by the
    Universal House of Justice -- legislation which it can itself
    abrogate and amend as conditions change. There is also a clear
    pattern already established in the Sacred Scriptures, in the
    interpretations made by 'Abdu'l-Bahá and Shoghi Effendi, and in
    the decisions so far made by the Universal House of Justice,
    whereby an area of the application of the laws is intentionally
    left to the conscience of each individual believer. This is the
    age in which mankind must attain maturity, and one aspect of this
    is the assumption by individuals of the responsibility for
    deciding, with the assistance of consultation, their own course of
    action in areas which are left open by the law of God. (The
    Universal House of Justice, 1988 Jun 05, Detailed Legislation on
    Moral Issues)

Finally, a proper spiritual education and virtuous conduct is itself
the best guarantee of liberty, even in situations where governments
are less than free. ‘Abdu’l-Bahá indicates how an upright, educated
citizenry can stand up for its liberties even with uncooperative
authorities:

    Close investigation will show that the primary cause of oppression
    and injustice, of unrighteousness, irregularity and disorder, is
    the people’s lack of religious faith and the fact that they are
    uneducated. When, for example, the people are genuinely religious
    and are literate and well-schooled, and a difficulty presents
    itself, they can apply to the local authorities; if they do not
    meet with justice and secure their rights and if they see that the
    conduct of the local government is incompatible with the Divine
    good pleasure and the king’s justice, they can then take their
    case to higher courts and describe the deviation of the local
    administration from the spiritual law. Those courts can then send
    for the local records of the case and in this way justice will be
    done. At present, however, because of their inadequate schooling,
    most of the population lack even the vocabulary to explain what
    they want. (Secret of Divine Civilization 14)

Note that in no way is this meant to be an endorsement of educational
elitism. Rather, it seems based on this quote that everyone, no matter
their facilities, has a right to be educated to such a point that:

* They are able to conduct their own independent investigations into
the truth, and

* When they are confronted with an injustice, they are able to press
their case on an even footing with others in power.

Such an education obviously would require the basics of what a public
education currently, but would be different in nature. This is an
interesting topic which, unfortunately, is out of the scope of this
paper.

Note that in addition to upholding the need for education and
spiritual development, this also seems to indicate support for the
right to petition for redress of grievances. The authorities are
humans in need of spiritual development as well; artificial barriers
shielding them from the knowledge that their actions are unjust are a
grave disservice to them!

### Guarantees of Liberty Important for the Public Sphere

Whereas the purpose of the liberties granted above are to ensure the
spiritual development of individuals, the Bahá’í writings hint at a
number of other liberties to be granted to assist development of the
public sphere. However, these seem to be more circumscribed then those
of citizens; those liberties that are alluded to (generally not
explicitly named) are those granted not so much to improve human
spiritual development per se, but to encourage the development of
civilization.

The following outline from _The Promulgation of Universal Peace_ puts
this into context:

    Under an autocratic government the opinions of men are not free,
    and development is stifled, whereas in democracy, because thought
    and speech are not restricted, the greatest progress is
    witnessed. It is likewise true in the world of religion. When
    freedom of conscience, liberty of thought and right of speech
    prevail -- that is to say, when every man according to his own
    idealization may give expression to his beliefs -- development and
    growth are inevitable. (Promulgation of Universal Peace 197)

Here, Abdu'-Baha seems to indicate explicit support of three freedoms
- freedom of conscience, freedom of thought and freedom of speech - as
supporting development and growth of civilization. Two allude to
concepts that have already been mentioned; the third (freedom of
speech) will be discussed later.

However, explicit grants of particular freedom in Bahá’í writings are
few, even though a broad tolerance of individual action is implied
throughout the writings. The Bahá’í primary repository of laws, the
Kitáb-i-Aqdas, list few liberties, and what few it does tend to be due
to specific repeal of restrictions from prior religious movements;
that is, one might say there is a "freedom to listen to music" or
"freedom to eat all food" or "freedom to marry across religious and
ethnic groups" based on such nullifications, but the intention to
explicitly create these freedoms seems doubtful. If we look in the
other works, including the one political work, _The Secret of Divine
Civilization_ (by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá), there is no enumeration of liberties
we are expected to enjoy by virtue of being a human being, let alone
those we enjoy as Bahá’ís.

Instead, Bahá’u’lláh and ‘Abdu’l-Bahá seemed far more focused on
various miscarriages of justice by the authorities than on liberty per
se. While enlightenment-era philosophers reacted to injustice by
authorities by minting liberties to be guaranteed to prevent abuses,
Bahá’í writings seem focused on preventing governmental problems that
create abuses in the first place. In _The Secret of Divine
Civilization_, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá spends much of the text enumerating the
qualifications of those who should be in government or, indeed, any
position involving power other others. This is a representative quote:

    It is unquestionable that the object in establishing parliaments
    is to bring about justice and righteousness, but everything hinges
    on the efforts of the elected representatives. If their intention
    is sincere, desirable results and unforeseen improvements will be
    forthcoming; if not, it is certain that the whole thing will be
    meaningless, the country will come to a standstill and public
    affairs will continuously deteriorate. “I see a thousand builders
    unequal to one subverter; what then of the one builder who is
    followed by a thousand subverters?”  (‘Abdu’l-Bahá, The Secret of
    Divine Civilization 11/49)

Shoghi Effendi, and later the Universal House of Justice, have much to
say about the internal governance of the Bahá’í Faith, saying little
about secular governments other to condemn various governmental
miscarriages and philosophical movements. These writings do give
certain guidelines within which authority structures within the Bahá’í
community are to behave, and some of these might imply certain
freedoms. For instance, assemblies are urged to avoid prying into the
affairs of individual Bahá’ís, and disciplinary action is reserved
only in the case of actions of a public and serious nature. Given that
these assemblies are embrace all in the fullness of time, this is a
more significant fact than one might realize. Perhaps it is possible
to puzzle out some implied "bill of Rights" in the Bahá’í community
that can be recommended for adoption for the world at large. However,
for reasons of scope, this author has refrained from this effort,
perhaps to be dealt with at another time.

There is, however, one thing that stands out in admonitions that one
would imagine must carry over to the secular world: an emphasis on
pushing action and decision-making down to the local level. Shoghi
Effendi often spoke of the "evils of over-centralization" (Bahá’í
Administration 141). It seems that must also be part of the picture.

All of which leads to the core difference between Bahá’í view of
liberty (in the context of government) and the secular view of liberty
as espoused in liberalism. In liberal governments, much energy is
spent devising governmental mechanisms by which power is not misused
so that liberties are protected. The assumption underlying this is
that power corrupts inherently, so a good government is one in which
liberties are safeguarded even in the case of moderate corruption in
authority. The whole "balance of powers" nature of government in
presidential governmental systems is a case in point - the theory is
by spreading around power, it is not possible for bad actors in
government to curtail liberties. However, in practice this is not the
case, as recrudescent threats to liberty still occur. Gridlocked
governments can be too sclerotic to take measures needed to defend
liberties of threatened peoples, resulting in loss of liberty;
meanwhile, governments unified under one party can just as easily
threaten liberty to those not part of their own power base, and often
attempt to undermine the democratic system by disenfranchising those
who would work against their reelection.

This focus on structural fixes is due to a misperception of what is
important in a government – structure versus values. An excessive
focus of “reforms” of governmental bodies miss a critical fact:
corrupt authorities are sufficient to defeat guarantees of liberties
in any system, whatever the structure. And there is virtually no
governmental system that has been tried that cannot be made free from
corruption. In fact, an overemphasis on structural nature of
governments can be a distraction. The fact that ‘Abdu’l-Bahá spent far
more time writing about qualifications of those in power rather than
structural solutions implies that the qualification and character of
the authorities, rather than the structure of the government, is far
more important for the maintenance of liberty. As ‘Abdu’l-Bahá points
out when discussing governments and organizations:

    … any agency whatever, though it be the instrument of mankind’s
    greatest good, is capable of misuse. Its proper use or abuse
    depends on the varying degrees of enlightenment, capacity, faith,
    honesty, devotion and highmindedness of the leaders of public
    opinion. (Secret of Divine Civilization 8/49)

A mistaken focus on the importance of governmental structures may be
the explanation for discussions (generally from outside the Bahá’í
Faith) regarding criticisms of “undemocratic” structures in the Baha’i
Administrative Order; for instance, the objection that Bahá’í
elections need an explicit nomination process. Those who have
suggested this have claimed the present system results in too much
power of incumbency, since the present system results in a defacto
"status quo" slate that could become easily entrenched by a
minority. Perhaps this comes from a sort of Popperian skepticism of
authority which has entrenched itself in academic thought. Or, perhaps
one could justify the fear of being voted out by an opposing bloc as
being a necessary check on power based on some tendentious reading of
Bahá’í writings; for instance, in _The Secret of Divine Civilization_
(11/49), ‘Abdu’l-Bahá states "elected representatives will on this
account [public input in elections] be somewhat inclined to exercise
justice, lest their reputation suffer and they fall into disfavor with
the public." However, those suggesting nominations and similar reforms
disregard the distorting effect that any such reform will have on the
candidate pools. If the theory that the quality of the representatives
is far more important than the structure of the government is true,
than it follows that any "reform" that may lower the quality of the
candidate pool is counterproductive – and from the Baha’i point of
view, the quality of administrators is the sole end goal. In any rate,
discussions of this nature have not received any actual support within
the Bahá’í community, while open discussion of other electoral
problems, such as underrepresentation of female delegates in
U.S. national convention elections and problems of general low turnout
has found more support in discussions within the Bahá’í community
(9). This is not surprising, given that these have obvious, provable
negative effects of quality of administration by limiting the pool of
talent from which the community can draw.

Additionally, one could say that liberty is conditional upon justice,
and without just and qualified authorities, there can be no guarantees
of liberty. The focus on justice is a far more important touchstone in
Bahá’í writings than liberty. Indeed, one would hope that application
of the Bahá’í writings would create a new liberty - that of the
expectation of a just government. And it is very important to note
that in the Bahá’í writings “justice” means something very specific -
it means that an appropriate balance of rewards and punishment is used
in the regulation and conduct of society, the “twin pillars” of world
stability and order (Gleaning 219). As Bahá’u’lláh states directly
elsewhere, “Justice, which consisteth in rendering each his due,
dependeth upon and is conditioned by two words: reward and
punishment.”  (Tabernacle of Unity 2.37). To adopt a gem from MBA
coursework: incentives are everything. To a well-adjusted individual,
there is nothing that seems more limiting and restrictive than
operating in a sphere where one is punished for "doing the right
thing," or receives rewards for covering up bad behavior by others and
corrupt action by oneself. Environments like this creates societies
where the most righteous people suck it up and suffer, while rewards
and power accumulate to the handful of individuals far less concerned
with ethics. Over time, this corruption will certainly lead to social
disorder and loss of freedoms, whatever they are agreed to be.

### An Aside on the Right of Speech
 
Earlier, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá mentions the "right of speech" as something
salutary that separates autocratic governments from democracy. Freedom
of speech (which generally extends to freedom of the press) is a
bedrock of most liberal democracies, and it is positively alluded
elsewhere by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá in his recorded talks. However, within the
writings, there are very specific caveats to this right within the
administration and teaching of the Baha’i Faith itself.

There are indications in a provisional translation of Bahá’u’lláh’s
"Tablet of Unity," that there is the need by Bahá’í teachers for a
"Unity of Speech":

    And another kind of unity is unity in speech. And this is very
    necessary. For example, consider that if two of the chosen ones of
    God should come to a town and should speak about the same matter
    and disagree, this would be the cause of disunity. It would cause
    them and those around them to be deprived and debarred from the
    bounties of unity which have been revealed by the Pen of the Lord
    of Being. That which aids the One True God has always been and is
    words (bayan), but in this most mighty dispensation, deeds and a
    goodly character are the hosts of the one True God and are
    responsible for the triumph of the Cause. If words are used to a
    due extent, they can be Divine mercy, but if they exceeds that,
    they become the cause of devastation. (Tablet of Unity 95)
    
Informally, this would indicate that those teaching the Bahá’í Faith
should consult with one another and taking care not to publicly
dispute differences in viewpoint regarding the faith. Notably, this
would seem to be a limitation that applies only to Bahá’ís engaged in
the course of teaching. With the growth of the Faith, this has been
formalized through the concept of publication review by Bahá’í
institutions.

This topic has been much more thoroughly discussed in the Universal
House of Justice statement “Individual Rights and Freedoms in the
World Order of Bahá’u’lláh”; this author has quoted from a provisional
translation of Bahá’u’lláh’s words rather than the statement to show
that the justifications given by the Universal House of Justice in
their statement did come out of nowhere. The Universal House of
Justice elaborates further on this concept:

    Clearly, then, there is more to be considered than the critic’s
    right to self-expression; the unifying spirit of the Cause of God
    must also be preserved, the authority of its laws and ordinances
    safeguarded, authority being an indispensable aspect of
    freedom. Motive, manner, mode, become relevant; but there is also
    the matter of love: love for one’s fellows, love for one’s
    community, love for one’s institutions. The responsibility resting
    on the individual to conduct himself in such a way as to ensure
    the stability of society takes on elemental importance in this
    context. For vital as it is to the progress of society, criticism
    is a two-edged sword: it is all too often the harbinger of
    conflict and contention. (IRF 379)
    
While this has caused some controversy among academics, those holding
membership in the Bahá’í community should be understanding in this
matter. The Bahá’í writings urge controls on speech in a number of
ways, both in tone and content. In tone, guidance indicates the
necessity of tact and courtesy in all our communications. As far as
content, there are numerous limitations on speech that are generally
accepted by Bahá’ís without argument - the prohibition of backbiting,
gossiping, discussion of partisan politics and the like. These
limitations, like Baha’i Laws generally, are of a voluntary nature,
and the Bahá’í community has no intention of forcibly imposing them
upon its believers, much less on those outside of the community. Yet
most Baha’is make a good-faith effort to abide by them. Likewise, the
Universal House of Justice notes the various forms in which dissent
can be channeled, such as Nineteen Day Feasts and the Spiritually
Assemblies, and indicates it is vital to critiques the community. As
quoted from Shoghi Effendi: “it is not only the right, but the vital
responsibility of every loyal and intelligent member of the community
to offer fully and frankly, but with due respect and consideration to
the authority of the Assembly, any suggestion, recommendation or
criticism he conscientiously feels he should in order to improve and
remedy certain existing conditions or trends in his local
community”. This author's suspicion is that the controversy
surrounding publication review is not its onerous nature, but the fact
that it is required at all.

There is another point regarding freedom of speech that must be
made. The reason for guarantees of free speech are different in Bahá’í
philosophy than in U.S. culture, where these guarantees are based on
"natural law." ‘Abdu’l-Bahá regards freedom of speech as a liberty
which assists society at large by assisting "development and growth."
Certainly, Bahá’ís would regard improper limitations on speech on
being an impediment to the independent investigation of truth by
others; for instance, self-censoring in consultations will not result
in the best decision.

Indeed, one reason for the urge to consult is to ensure that input can
be heard from many, all the better to stop falsehoods masquerading
themselves as “conventional wisdom.” Per the Bahá’í grounding, freedom
of speech is necessary because it is a liberty which, when granted, is
a benefit to society and others; it is not it is an individual
privilege as a benefit to oneself. As such, it is not an individual
right to be misused. The crude and insulting nature of much of today's
speech gives ample evidence that some forms of free speech are a net
negative for society, no matter what benefit such “venting” may accrue
to the speaker.

This is distinct from the Western formulation of freedom of speech as
an "inalienable right." Philosophically, the Baha’i view seems more
defensible. The concept of speech as "inalienable" is a bit stretched;
were it truly inalienable, it would be difficult for any individual to
cede, even voluntarily, control of it. The fact that all sorts of
corporations, legal organizations and judicial authorities impose
things like gag orders, nondisclosure agreements, nondisparagement
clauses and the like, and that such legal devices are frequently
upheld in courts of law, show that whatever lip service one may give
to speech being inalienable, it is not de facto inalienable
(10). Untrammeled freedom of speech does not exist anywhere in any
form, and it is disingenuous to suggest that the modest limitations
imposed by "unity of speech," in the form of a publication review or
otherwise, are somehow suggestive of a totalitarian state.

Indeed, given the importance of the “independent investigation of the
truth,” it should be noted that misuse of the freedom of speech and
the freedom of the press can be just as significant an impediment to
this as its restriction, as it allows the unfettered dissemination of
misinformation and outright lies. Many lovers of truth in democracies
have been horrified by the slow slide of the free press into partisan
outlets for misinformation, and looked on with concern as vital
impartial news coverage of important events has slowly been replaced
by “analysis” pieces offering only opinion and “infotainment” programs
full of resentments and thinly-veiled contempt for others. The shift
toward internet technologies has not created a new dynamic, but merely
amplified one that was already in existence. Here again, the Universal
House of Justice indicates how this can be improved:

    [‘Abdu’l-Bahá] writes of the “publication of high thoughts” as the
    “dynamic power in the arteries of life,” “the very soul of the
    world”. Moreover, He states that, “Public opinion must be directed
    toward whatever is worthy of this day, and this is impossible
    except through the use of adequate arguments and the adducing of
    clear, comprehensive and conclusive proofs.” As to manner and
    style, Bahá’u’lláh has exhorted “authors among the friends” to
    “write in such a way as would be acceptable to fair-minded souls,
    and not lead to cavilling by the people”. And He issues a
    reminder: “We have said in the past that one word hath the
    influence of spring and causeth hearts to become fresh and
    verdant, while another is like unto blight which causeth the
    blossoms and flowers to wither.” In the light of all this, the
    code of conduct of the press must embrace the principles and
    objectives of consultation as revealed by Bahá’u’lláh. Only in
    this way will the press be able to make its full contribution to
    the preservation of the rights of the people and become a powerful
    instrument in the consultative processes of society, and hence for
    the unity of the human race. (IRF 381)
    
## A BAHÁ’Í ALTERNATIVE TO THE “LIBERTY” OF LIBERALISM

Having surveyed the Bahá’í Writings, we now have a vision of liberties
as outlined by the Bahá’í Faith. While this is not a vision of
untrammeled freedom that some desire, or even a reflection of the
standard beliefs of liberalism, neither is it an outright repudiation
of liberalism; as will be shown, the Baha’i Faith has little common
cause with many critics of liberalism, and it is notable that only
under liberal governments has the Baha’i Faith had the opportunity to
spread unimpeded. However, rather than reconciling itself to
liberalism, the Baha’i vision seeks to draw a new vision by focusing
on the development human potential as primary, guaranteeing certain
freedoms while deemphasizing some others.  From the point of view of a
person's spiritual development, it seems that what it works toward is
an ideal of liberties in spiritual growth, or in secular language,
self-actualization. Note that despite the obviously pro-religious
stance of the Bahá’í Faith, the freedoms themselves are not
conditional upon a particular religious belief. Instead, what it
guarantees are the sorts of freedoms that would allow someone to
follow their own spiritual and personal development path.

It is indeed true that the Bahá’í vision does not uphold the same mix
of liberties as in most Western societies. However, its outlines are
familiar enough that one would imagine perhaps some other sort of
democracy somehow hitting upon this combination by historical
accident. This combination of pushing decisions to the local level
where they can be best evaluated, disinterested authorities committed
to justice and efficiency rather their own benefit or inclinations,
focus on the necessity to educate and inform enlightened opinion, and
admonitions to otherwise leave people free to their own initiatives
would seem to paint a picture of a society animated by freedom in
service to other ends. This is especially the case when viewed in the
context of other Bahá’í writings - specifically, those writings
exhorting the need for justice and the requirement of proper rewards
and punishment for a flourishing society. It seems evident that where
there is a conflict between the application of justice and the
granting of liberties in society, the Bahá’í teachings will invariably
come down on the side of justice.

There is also important between the Baha’i Faith and other critics of
liberalism. Generally, other critics of liberalism come from the point
of view referred to as conservativism. Conservatism is generally
thought of as the strain of thought most opposed to liberalism. But
the Bahá’í viewpoint should not be confused with conservatism simply
because it offers a critique to liberalism. An overview of the points
above should show that the forward-looking Bahá’í viewpoint be
confused with conservatism, with its traditionalism and
backward-looking views. The following quote from The World Order of
Baha’u’llah by Shoghi Effendi is a typical quote regarding the Baha’i
viewpoint to traditional beliefs:

    If long-cherished ideals and time-honored institutions, if certain
    social assumptions and religious formulae have ceased to promote
    the welfare of the generality of mankind, if they no longer
    minister to the needs of a continually evolving humanity, let them
    be swept away and relegated to the limbo of obsolescent and
    forgotten doctrines. Why should these, in a world subject to the
    immutable law of change and decay, be exempt from the
    deterioration that must needs overtake every human institution?
    For legal standards, political and economic theories are solely
    designed to safeguard the interests of humanity as a whole, and
    not humanity to be crucified for the preservation of the integrity
    of any particular law or doctrine.
    
Given how typical this quote is, it is hard to see how the Baha’i
Faith can be described as conservative in attitude. However, Baha’i
views may find communitarian critiques more sympathetic.

The conclusions of this paper do not necessarily require a religious
interpretation. Indeed, one purpose of this article is to present a
viewpoint can even inform present-day discussion of a secular
nature. Admittedly, the individual elements themselves are not
controversial; this author must admit some disappointment that after
all this work, what one is left with is a set of guidelines that will
leave some readers thinking "Well, I could've told you that." Many
people would agree that the noblest liberty is to be able to fulfill
your capabilities, develop your spirit and freely investigate the
truth. Many people, certainly the founders of the great democracies,
agree that an educated population is necessary for the maintenance of
a free government. All would agree in the needs for governments to be
just and even-handed, and that they must be run by qualified,
fair-minded people of good character. Where the Bahá’í Faith differs
is its formulation of Liberty, in which Liberty is relegated to a
secondary role, and where most of the rights granted is a “downstream”
effect of an accumulation of virtuous choices made by individuals,
societies and governments.  This writer has found no formulation of
“natural rights” in the Bahá’í Faith that parallels the common
definition in Western liberal society. Instead, guarantees of certain
liberties and rights exist to serve the spiritual development and
advancement of civilization, and its defense is maintained by other
things. To seek to expand liberty without addressing the foundations
of liberty is putting the cart before the horse. The basis and
justification for this argument is in the Bahá’í writings, but it can
certainly be reasoned from secular sources as well.

From a secular point of view, one may object that I have downplayed
one critical element ‘Abdu’l-Bahá discussed in his list of
qualifications for government authorities and administrators - strong
religious background and belief in God. This is true and should
absolutely be pointed out. However, in this author's opinion, it is a
mistake to make too much of this. ‘Abdu’l-Bahá states that this is
important because the "fear of God" should be a motivator for the
actions of those in leadership, not the hope for riches or other
remuneration. Notably, he does not list "being a good Muslim" as a
qualification. This paper will not discuss the various questions
raised by this; this author admits it is a question worth examining.

### Secularism and the "Bootstrap" Problem

From the point of view of philosophical soundness, there is a
conundrum here. The thesis states that to create a situation in which
liberties can be enjoyed by all, particular liberties (such as freedom
of conscience) are “foundational” and those must be recognized and
granted. Where present in individuals, society and government, this
creates a self-reinforcing cycle. However, there are cases where
authorities are corrupt and the citizenry uneducated, spiritually
bereft, and generally beaten-down into compliance. What is to happen
in societies where these freedoms are not granted? How does one
"bootstrap" such a society to one where liberties are granted?
Maintenance of freedom of conscience and religious freedom, however
difficult, may be crucial.

In situations of extreme corruption, a popular course of action is to
simply eliminate the unjust authorities. In this case, popular and
common-sense does not necessarily mean effective. There have been a
number of interesting "natural experiments" in governmental structures
where authoritarian leadership was decapitated, and generally the
result has not been pretty. Russia, a country with a rich
philosophical and spiritual tradition, suffered for most of a century
under a brutal system that limited freedom of conscience and the
independent investigation of truth. Some of its neighbors, whom the
USSR occupied, were likewise ruled by their own totalitarian regimes,
but a few managed to either escape the worst of the inquisitions or
managed with their religious structures intact in spite of the
occupation. The contrast between them in the years since the cold war
is stunning. Czechoslovakia (now the Czeck Republic and Slovakia), a
country that somehow escaped the worst of the repression and managed
to keep its intellectual culture intact, quickly transitioned to a
democracy; Poland, a country that had managed to keep alive a strong
Catholic tradition also experienced a successful transition. Russia,
on the other hand, descended into kleptocracy within a decade and is
now recognized as having very poor defense of liberty. The recent
"Arab Spring" has had similarly mixed results - successful in
middle-income Tunisia, but much less so than other countries where
intellectual life was dominated by a tiny handful of elites, with the
bulk of the uneducated mass of citizenry under the sway of a rigid
fundamentalist clerical class.

If eliminating authoritarians is a bad place to start, that leaves the
spiritual development of the citizens themselves. It is possible,
through ideal spiritual education by communities along with dedication
and tenacity, for isolated communities to give themselves this freedom
- working where they can on their own, educating their members and
generally building the virtues needed for a working, free
society. This is the picture one sees in the “Hollywood” presentation
of the civil rights struggle, where African-American leaders of
uncommonly strong religious belief manage to gain rights long denied
by their state governments. And something like this continues to be
carried out by the heroic, long-suffering Bahá’í communities in the
Cradle of The Faith. This would seem to be more promising over the
long term, since when such a change does happen, people are prepared
to make any change for the good. But this is a worrisome solution – as
is said, over the long term, everyone is dead. As a mechanism of
change, these make for heroic images, but this is indeed a lot to ask
of communities – to do it all on their own, while waiting for a deus
ex machina to bring relief to their situation. It would be
unrealistic, for example, to expect for this to happen organically and
unaided in truly totalitarian societies such as North Korea.
 
Nevertheless, it seems the wisest long-term course for assisting
societies under unjust governments is to do one can to ensure the
population itself can develop the virtues required for spiritual and
development unimpeded. Given that, advocates of liberty must insist
that the one of the freedoms that must be protected include religious
freedoms. Religious communities are one of the few things that have
shown the ability to give such people strength to rebuild
communities. The secular critics of religious movements are
wrongheaded if they think that dramatic rollback in religious belief
will somehow strengthen guarantees of liberty; if anything, the
fragile nature of democracy under once-atheistic authoritarian states
and the increasing secular established European democracies prove
quite the opposite. For those who claim that guarantees of religious
freedom are misplaced and cling to the notion that religious
communities bring more harm on balance than good, one can rightly pose
why liberal values bequeathed to more secular populations have proven
so brittle under the swan songs of nationalism and tribalism.

Meanwhile, it appears that a society with guarantees of liberty is
much harder to regain once lost than to maintain it to begin
with. Maintaining such a society requires a commitment by citizens to
putting into government only those individuals capable of effective
administration and just decisions, independent of whatever their
political views might be. It also requires a dedication by both the
citizenry and authorities to ensure that the citizenry is dedicated to
their own spiritual development and proper respect for knowledge and
truth. A lack of concern for justice by society members inevitably
leads to both a lack of spiritual growth and a tolerance of leaders
who, despite their flaws, maintain power by catering to their worst
instincts in the community. A lack of concern for knowledge and truth
by society members has similar negative effects, allowing the
construction by citizens of false world views that prevent proper
self-development. The result of these is a spiral of decreasing
liberty that can only be stopped by a return to the virtues that made
liberty possible in the first place. Screaming for liberties will not
get you liberty – it can only be won (or re-won) the hard way.  A
common slogan from the well-armed crowd is, "you don't get freedom for
free"; while the Bahá’í writings would agree with that, they certainly
don't agree that they come from the barrel of a gun.

## CONCLUSION

It has been proposed that Liberty is an inappropriate measure for the
goodness of society. Unfortunately, the dominance of the philosophy of
liberalism ensures that many will continue to think in those
terms. The Baha’i Faith, rather than endorse liberalism, retains the
same broad aims as respect for all and the upliftment of humanity
while not endorsing liberalism. Instead it “approve[s] of liberty in
certain circumstances, and refuse[s] to sanction it in others." Rather
than focus on liberty as such, the Baha’i Faith identifies certain
foundational liberties and elements in the culture and government,
including these and others:

• Respect for unfettered freedom of conscience;

• Respect for an individual’s right to independently investigate the truth;

• Measures to ensure the education of all members of society, to such
  an extent that all can properly utilize the above two freedoms, and
  gain the ability to effectively communicate with authorities for
  determining just decisions;

• Selection of government authorities and administrators based on
  concern for justice, virtuous conduct and competence, not on other
  measures such as expediency, political leanings or ethnic
  favoritism;

• Use of justice as the motivating force for government, where
  “justice” is defined by concern for properly incentivized conduct
  (i.e. application of “rewards and punishments”).

Analysis shows that without these things, guarantees of liberty by
governments or societies, however expansive, are meaningless, and the
preservation of these conditions are the most important means to
defend continued individual and civic liberties.

This is just the result of one individual’s
investigations. Verification of this analysis is important. Though
this proposal is derived from the writings, it requires further
investigation into its soundness.  One particular point is that this
author can find no backing in the Bahá’í Writings for certain “natural
rights” held inalienable under liberalism, such as freedom of press or
right to own certain types of property. There are, of course, heavy
cultural pressures that would induce people to read such things into
the writings. Actually finding such evidence would change the
conclusions of this paper. One might point out that the sorts of
biblical writings that were used to support the initial formulation of
liberalism are available in abundance in the Baha’i writings, but
given that liberalism had been formulated one hundered and fifty years
before the founding of the Baha’i Faith, Baha’u’llah certainly would
have explicitly ratified this view, given his knowledge of it.

Presuming these conclusions hold true, this outlook should assist the
Bahá’í community in its outreach and work with the community. Given
recent emphasis on broadening of social development activity in the
Baha’i community, some obvious ideas for how Baha’is could assist
based on these beliefs would include:

- Involvement in the defense of religious minorities and religious
  freedoms;

- Involvement in movements in support of truthful journalism,
  fact-checking;

- Involvement in civic organizations promoting respectful dialog and
  consultation;

- Promotion of efforts to ensure educational rights and freedoms for
  all;

- Movements in support of justice in all facets of society.

It is evident that these are all things are things that could be done
by any civic-minded organization, and one could complain they do not
do something “distinctively Baha’i” in nature. However, such
activities at least have the merit of teaching the precepts of the
faith by deeds rather than just words. Additionally, such activities
allow Baha’is to publicly take a stand for what they believe is
important, without at any time forcing them to embrace or proclaim
overtly political points of view. If one believes it is necessary to
show that the Bahá’í view on liberty is sophisticated, respectful of
people’s rights and initiative, demonstration of such claims are
helpful. In doing so, the Bahá’í community would offer valuable
lessons challenging conventional wisdom. Given the current needs of
the ages, such a perspective is invaluable and timely.

## End Notes
1. Within the context of this paper, 'liberal' is generally used
as an adjective or noun to indicating something or someone adhering to
the philosophy of liberalism, e.g. a “liberal democratic”
government. This is the classical definition of the word liberal. This
is not to be confused with the more common usage of the world
“liberal” in the United States, where it has acquired the connotation
of a person inclined to grant a great deal of liberties with respect
to conduct in social and private sphere, but favoring the restriction
of liberties in the sphere of commerce. Some writers in the United
States have taken to referring to referring to belief in certain
economic freedoms as neoliberalism, in spite of this actually being a
somewhat older connotation of the term liberal.

2. Where “Western” democracies are referred to, it does not mean
those exclusively to the Western hemisphere, or in Europe; rather, it
refers to the functioning liberal democracies of much of the civilized
world, which take as their operational basis the Western European
philosophy of liberalism. Note that at least nominally, much of the
nonwestern world is under liberal governments.

3. The cultivation of this “personal liberty,” e.g. freedom to
act without unconscious manipulation, is a recurrent theme throughout
the mystical traditions of all the major religious; it is particularly
significant in Buddhist thought. Secular writers have also addressed
this from a psychological angle; postwar Europe saw a flurry of
secular writers such as  Anna Harendt, Erich Fromm and Viktor Frankl,
all of whom theorized why populations in liberal democratic traditions
found themselves so easily manipulated into supporting authoritarian
programs of a horrific nature.

4. The most significant critique of liberalism as a worldview, from a
Baha’i outlook, is the Universal House of Justice statement “Rights
and Freedoms in the World Order of Baha’u’llah” (1988). In addition,
several sections in the commissioned work _Century of Light_ also
analyze the problems caused by unquestioned acceptance of this
worldview, particularly in the economic sphere.

5. There are in fact numerous strains of libertarianism. The writers
listed all represent the “right libertarian” wing, a movement that
seeks to maximize commercial liberty at the expense of everything
else, including other personal liberties (particularly for those
different from themselves). This wing represents the views of most
self-proclaimed libertarians in the United State and has become the de
facto political philosophy of much of the capitalist superclass. One
is tempted to think of this philosophy when _Century of Light_ writes of
the challenges of global inequality: “ ... the greatest danger of both
the moral crisis and the inequities associated with globalization in
its current form is an entrenched philosophical attitude that seeks to
justify and excuse these failures.” Many other forms of libertarianism
do not have these flaws, but still have their own challenges that make
them difficult to reconcile with Baha’i outlook.

6. Here again, in the United States, the word “conservative” has a
different connotation, in that many self-identified conservatives are
strong believers in economic liberalism who have conservative views
only in the private sphere and in the belief in maintenance of
traditional hierarchies in society. Confusingly, some of these claim
to be “libertarians” as well.

7. In the United States, a poll from Pew Research found that 11% of
all United States residents self-described as being “libertarians,”
but the bulk of them did not actually hold consistent libertarian
viewpoints; instead, they fit within other identifiable political
views reflecting others who did not self-identify as
libertarian. Using cluster analysis, they found no group large enough
to represent stable statistical subgroup holding consistent
libertarian beliefs were held, and estimate it may be held by at most
5% of the population
([link to study](http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/08/25/in-search-of-libertarians/)).

8. For readers whose threshold for nonsense has not been sufficiently
violated by their own Facebook feeds, I offer this for consideration:
https://mic.com/articles/150833/flat-earth-theories-truthers-youtube. Be
warned – this is ten minutes of your time you will never get back.

9. Skeptical readers who think discussions of low turnout and lack of
diversity and the necessity of its improvement does not count as a
reform should keep in mind the many secular politicians who, in words
and deeds, do everything they can to decrease such things in
functioning democracies.

10. Ironically, the guardians of commerce who rail against any hint of
limitation on their ability to press their case to politicians and the
public via massive and oftentimes misleading PR campaigns are
frequently the same people who aggressively press limits on speech
upon less powerful individuals through a variety of legal
mechanisms. Were speech truly inalienable, this sort of chicanery
would not even be possible, let alone common.

11. Unfortunately, current events as of this writing (early 2017) may
obviate the situation in Poland.

### Works Cited
‘Abdu’l-Bahá. ‘Abdu’l-Bahá in London. Bahá’í eBooks Publications,
eBook version 1.0.

‘Abdu’l-Bahá. The Promulgation of Universal Peace. Bahá’í Publishing
Trust, 1997.

‘Abdu’l-Bahá. Selections from the Writings of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá. Bahá’í
 Publishing Trust, 1997.

‘Abdu’l-Bahá. The Secret of Divine Civilization. Bahá’í eBooks
Publications, eBook version 2.0.

‘Abdu’l-Bahá on Divine Philosophy, compiled by Elizabeth Fraser
Chamberlain, http://bahai-library.com/abdulbaha_divine_philosophy,
downloaded 1/22/2017 (original: Tudor Press, 1918).

Bahá’u’lláh. Gleanings from the Writings of Bahá’u’lláh. Bahá’í
Publishing Trust, 1991.

Bahá’u’lláh. The Kitáb-i-Aqdas. Bahá’í World Center, 1992. Print.

Bahá’u’lláh. The Seven Valleys and The Four Valleys. Bahá’í Publishing
Trust, 1991.

Bahá’u’lláh. “Tablet of Unity,” provisional translation Moojan Momen
in Lights of Irfan 2 (2001), 94-98.

Bahá’u’lláh. The Tabernacle of Unity. Gutenberg.org edition, PDF.
Effendi, Shoghi. Bahá’í Administration. Bahá’í Publishing Trust, 1974.
Hobbes, Thomas. Leviathan. Project Gutenberg edition
(http://www.gutenberg.org/files/3207/3207-h/3207-h.htm), 2013.

Locke, John. Second Treatise on Government.  Project Gutenberg edition
(http://www.gutenberg.org/files/7370/7370-h/7370-h.htm), 2010.

The Oxford Companion to Philosophy, Ted Honderich ed. Oxford
University Press, 2005.

Universal House of Justice, Letter of 5 June 1988, “Detailed
Legislation on Moral Issues.”

Universal House of Justice, Letter of 29 December 1988, “Individual
Rights and Freedoms,” in Lights of Irfan 14 (2013), 367-385.

Universal House of Justice, Letter of 8 February 1998, “Materialistic
Elements in Academic Scholarship.”
