---
title: What Fragile Masculinity is Really All About
---

## What Fragile Masculinity is Really All About
A very short blog post, this time about the so-called "fragile masculinity."

One theory behind the resurgency of authoritarian leaders and
resurgence in intolerance and racism, particularly among the male
gender, is the problem of ["fragile masculinity."](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2018/11/29/how-donald-trump-appeals-to-men-secretly-insecure-about-their-manhood/?utm_term=.8c9d75036278) The idea is that the
problem is that many men have felt they have failed _as men_; perhaps
they are not as successful as they like, perhaps never contracted
marriage or had children. Having failed at doing "manly" things, they
therefore resort to grabbing power however they can, namely by playing
the "beta male" and supporting leaders who restore them to what they
feel are rightful positions of privilege.

This is a nice folk explanation; it may even be true. But I want to
take aim at the whole concept of masculinity as a stable entity
itself.  The problem is not of fragile masculinity; the problem is
masculinity itself, as traditionally understood, as fragile.

People use phrases like "fragile masculinity" are also prone to useing
prhases like "toxic masculinity," and referring to it as if it is a
different sort of problem. Toxic masculinity is a problem many men
have that results in overidentifying with masculine norms. Such people
use force when unnecessary, act aggresively, use their size to
intimidate others (especially women), and generally make people
miserable in their attempts to carve out territory for themselves as
if they were any other great ape in the jungle.

Fragile masculinity and toxic masculinity are two things are treated
as if they are different. They are really the same.

The problem underlying all of this is that the traditional definitions
of masculinity - powering your way above others, asserting yourself at
any cost, viewing women primarily as sexual conquestions - _require
you to be a jerk. And not just be a jerk - but be a **colossal** jerk
_and get away with it all the time_. Now, I'm not sure why I so rarely
hear things stated in this terms other than by the occasional
femenist; perhaps people think exactly that, but don't want to level
blame or appear to be talking down to people. But there it is.

This is a big problem. Masculinity is fragile because you can't embody it
and be anything other than a detestable chimpanzee at the same time.

Here's my opinions as to what happens. A lot of men think it
necessarily that part of being a man means arresting your moral
development at some level. Somewhere during adolescence,
considerations of approval by "grown ups" fade to the background, and
young men instead busy themselves impressing other immature males by
dominating others to almost an abusive extent, at everything, all the
time. To some extent, this is actively _encouraged_ by society -
mainly through a ridiculous "boys will be boys" attitude in society,
media, even in literature; an attitude that encourages juvenile
wrongdoing and looks the other way _so long as it is done by whites_
(or other favored group). Masculinity, in this sense, is both toxic
and fragile. Toxic in that it inclucates attitudes that would be
considered absolutely immoral and intolerable if practiced by women or
"out-group" minorities. Fragile in the sense that it is
unmaintainable.

Here is the problem with this behavior:
1. Eventually you're going to stop getting away with it
2. Eventually you're going to grow at least a little conscienceness

Nobody can do this. In theory, it should be easy. Anyone with a modicum
of business sense and big brass cajones could be very, very successful
at a huge number of grifts and fraudulent activites, and the penalty
of being caught is very low. There is even plenty of help in the
philosophy aisle of the bookstore, if you want to snuff out whatever
is getting in the way of your killer instinct. That will make you the
absolute alpha male, the ubermensch striding the world through
scrappiness and "disruptive" rule-breaking. But most men have a
conscience, even if it's just a sliver, that keeps them from such
depths. Instead, perhaps they may be able to throttle their conscience
enough to kick down minorities or other out-groups, but they can't
do it consistently. Whether through concience or fear, they simply
can't keep up the nonstop warrior outlook. They cannot be "real men"
according to their chimpanzee code of conduct.

Perhaps that is the reason why some men wish to outsource their
thuggishness to detestable leaders. They could be a "real man," if
they wanted to. But they can't do it and and at the same time look in
the mirror at themselves and respect what they've become.

So how does one cure this problem? How does one cure masculinity, if
it is masculinity itself that is the problem?

The only way to do it is simply dump the idea of masculinity.

Yes, dump it.

What to replace it with? How about just being a decent human, eh?
There is a lot of research that poses that the "default" state of
affairs in business, politics and culture in general, is masculine
oriented. Men invented the social constructs, so there you are. Want
to be a man? Just stop THERE. The default position. If you're a man,
simply don't try to be a man. Just getting along in American society,
your actions will be "manly" enough anyway. Let's look at some of the
positive attributes of the traditionally "manly" things - having a job
you care about, taking care of your family, keeping your cool under
pressure. Manly, sure, but there is nothing specifically male about
these activities! Pick up a men's magazine, and if you discard all
the ridiculous advice about grooming, cars, and impressing women,
you'll be left with a bunch of self-help articles that apply just as
well to women as men. These positive "masculine" traits all just fall
under the category of "being a grownup." So just friggin' DO
THAT. Don't waste time trying to be a man. Be a human, and the
manliness will follow.
