---
title: Present at Birth - The "Paleo" Diet
---

## Present at Birth: The "Paleo" Diet
"Hey Joe, get this! Corn causes arthritis!"

"Oh... and Joe. Beans cause alzheimers!"

It was my officemate, David. The year was 1994. I had just walked into
my office and sat down, when he presented me this somewhat dubious
information without even saying "Hi." I would've been a little
suspicious to begin with; David was a fellow Kentuckian of similar
sensibilities to myself - prone to deadpan sarcasm and a touch of
cynicism about humankind's predeliction for nonsense and
wish-fulfillment. He was shooting the bull with another engineering
technician in my office, both of them rolling their eyes and laughing.

Obviously David had a bizarre story to tell involving made-up
pseudoscientific nonsense, and I wasn't going to get any work done
until he told it. Austin at that time was full of health-food adherents
- I imagine it still is. But little did I realize that my officemate
David had the distinction of being present at the birth of something
at the far end of the oddness spectrum.

The Paleo Diet.

It was the Monday after Thanksgiving. Thanksgiving, the day whereon
people from all walks of life commingle under the family roof to
discuss conspiracy theories, crank investment ideas fictional stories
about politicians they don't like. Occasionally there is a "bad idea"
that unifies Thanksgivings across America: Bitcoin and Donald Trump
are two recent examples. But most Thanksgivings there is usually no
central "bad idea" to bring the nation together as a mass of
lemmings. Instead, in 1994, David was exposed to what was then a very
obscure bad idea.

For that Thanksgiving, David stayed in town and celebrated with an
extended relation in Austin. At this Thanksgiving, he knew no one
other than his cousin, leaving him alone with other barely-connected
guests in a similar situation. He soon struck up an extended
conversation with someone who struck David as a bit of a ne'er
do-well, the sort of person who didn't have what one would think of as
"real job." Instead, like all such people in Texas, he had an idea he
was convinced would bring him riches and earn his rightful place in
the world as a "winner." Unasked, he began presenting to David his
ideas about: diet.

According to this person, civilization had ruined mankind's
diet. People had evolved over a million years as hunters, whereas
civilization was but a blink of an eye on the evolutionary scale. So
the way to a healthy diet was to have a diet just like those
hunters. Meat and lots of it. Oh, and some greens and berries, but
only those you could gather from the wild.  This guest blamed all of
our present health ailments on our intake of certain grains, legumes,
and other "bad foods."

Hence the pronouncement that beans gives you alzheimers.

When another guest asked the obvious question "how did you find this
out," the guest had no proof. "Oh, it's just a working hypthesis. I
have no proof; it's just a theory. In fact, I'm not sure I even
believe it."

But the man certainly practiced what he preached. Among the entire
Thanksgiving smorgasbord, he only touched the ham, and David couldn't
help but speculate that the whole thing was an overreaction to being
forced to eat vegetables as a child. And perhaps because vegetarians
really seemed to piss him off.

David also learned what was probably another side motivation. He was
publishing a diet book based on his theories.

"Get this, Joe! He's calling his book... 'Neander-THIN'! Get it, Joe?
Neander. Thin. Pretty cool, huh?" *chuckle*

-----------------------------

At the time we all had a laugh about it. For the next year, "the
NeanderThin diet" became a running joke between us, but we figured
that was the end of that. David heard no more of the mystery author;
we presumed the book, if published, would suffer the same fate as the
typical self-publication: the bulk of the printing run rotting in somebody's
garage.

But it was not the end. A few years later, I was at Whole Foods (at
that time, a rather large Austin-only chain known for their - get this
- competitive pricing), looking at the cookbooks. What do I see but an
odd-looking, obviously self-published diet book with crude
hand-drawn cover art that didn't seem to fit into the rest of the
stacks of crunch-granola books.

_Neander-Thin_ was the title.

At the time I was a bit astonished. First of all, at Whole Foods, the
bulk of people who shopped there were vegetarians. They didn't sell
much meat, though they did seel some very high-end stuff. Normally,
the book stock they carried seemed to have the entire purpose of
pushing the high-margin quack remedies they sold in the middle ailes
(homeopathy? aromatherapy?). I imagined the only reason they sold
vegetarian cookbooks was to get an occasional buck off of people like
me who otherwise only came there for bulk goods and never gave them a
dime of profit. Given that Whole Foods book section was full of
quackery, seeing bad diet advice was a given. But this particular
strain of bad advice seemed out of place. Why would they carry a book
that seemed to be the Male Wish Fulfillment Diet? One which was probably
written only because the author was pissed off about health claims by
vegetarians - that is, the people making up Whole Food's customer base?

But somehow, the man had done it.

I flipped through the book quickly, and it was all there, just as in
David's story: the BS about grains and beans, the just-so-stories of
our meat-eating ancestors. I put the book down, not knowing whether to
be amused or nonplussed by the fact he had actually managed to get
someone to stock his book.

But that wasn't the end of it! Several years later - mid-2000s - I see some
guy on a late-night talk show, probably Conan. He looks like the guy
from the GEICO Cave-Man commercial. He's talking about his cave-man
lifestyle, how he doesn't use modern products like shampoo, soap and
the like (it showed) and how he got most of his exercise by running
and jumping through forested areas. But what really psyched Mr. GEICO
was his diet:

- "The Paleo Diet"!

And he spent most of his time talking about all these alleged health
benefits - and how our modern diet is out of sync with our
evolutionary beginnings.  Like we eat grains and beans, things our
caveman ancestors did not.

And so he goes, riffing through exaggerated, bareley-researched health
claims - the same one as in the Neanderthin book. By now it was
obvious - David's friend was not alone. Perhaps he was the first,
perhaps a follower. But there was a movement - a movement probably
predicated on nothing more than the desire to eat more meat and push
back on anyone who said otherwise.

And nowadays, The Paleo Diet is a _thing_. You want a diet book? A
good chunk of them are based on this diet, which seems to have filled
the void created by the sudden unpopularity of the Adkins Diet. (The
Adkins Diet, let you forget, lost its popularity shortly after it's
inventor died an early death of heart disease.)

(*** heavy sigh***)

If you do a search on Amazon, you now can find a crapton of books on
the "Paleo diet." Many of them seem reasonable; few seem to repeat the
same line of argument as the original books, and present this diet as a
way to eat healthy "real food" without starving. But if you look hard,
you will find among them a twenty-year-old book called "The
Neanderthin Diet." I have no idea if it this is the same book. The
pronouncements about the book certainly make me think it could've been
this self-same book. The blurbs have a valedictory tone, as if the
authors were groundbreaking intellectuals of an important movement.

My take on this? I thought was nonsense then. I don't think much more
of it now.

-------------------------------

I suppose I should not look too harshly on the sayings of men, and the
paleo diet seems no more poorly researched than many other
diets. Indeed, you can find plenty of good by following a paleo
diet. But your success will have everything to do with the
restrictiveness of the diet; if you follow it, you are by happenstance
following the "Pollan Diet." That is, you've taken the important step
of restricting your intake to actual food, as opposed to much of the
manufactured "food" in our diet. And many people who now write about the
paleo diet don't emphasize the flawed "caveman logic" of the original
writers, nor do they have the evident animus against vegetarians.

What about my beliefs? Personally I'm far more inclined to side with
vegetarians in this row for a number of reasons, but I have no beef
with anyone who thinks otherwise. As far as religious beliefs, while
the Baha'i Faith has no dietary restrictions, there are passages in
the writings which recommend _vegeterianism_. Indeed, Baha'i central
figure Abdu'l-Baha referred to vegetarianism as "the diet of the
future." He did not rule out meat, though: he said it was necessary
for **children and the sick**, for instance.

Still, I'm not vegetarian myself, and as indicated, since there is by
now some truth in the Paleo diet I'm willing to give it hearing. But
why it caught on is interesting. Baha'i Writings discuuss that there
are two sorts of ideas: certain ideas catch on _in spite of_ people's
desire that it be otherwise, because people realize through experience
that to live as if it were untrue leads to error and bad
experiences. But other ideas catch on merely because people wish them to
be true. If you don't think those writings are credible, Daniel
Kahneman's _Thinking Fast and Slow_ spends a lot of time talking about
strong people's predelicition to believe what they want to believe, in
spite of edividence.

The Paleo Diet as originally conceived plainly seemed based only on a
desire that it be true. While perhaps today's incarnations incorporate
dietary research, it seems the original proponents received a hearing
by appealing to a ready consituency of men who wanted it to be true
and had an active dislike for people who thought otherwise. The bigger
point is that virtually _any_ ideology can catch on, provided there is
a constituency ready to prop it up. To see a far more extreme,
depressing example, look up "flat earth" on Google. There are a lot of
honest-to-God actual flat-earthers. Why are there flat-earthers?
Because of the built in constituency. There are a lot of people in the
world who badly want to be thought of as smart, as experts, but they
do not have distinguished capability in this area - indeed, they may
have even been told they are lacking in this area. But in this arena
of thought, they get to reign unchallened among their peers. They feel
special. They feel like part of an "intellectual elite." Why wouldn't
they take part among such a movement, since there are no practical
consequences for their misbelief?

The problem is when such people tip things into majority
status. Fortunately, you have pointy-headed useless elitest
intellectuals who have nominated themselves to keep this from
happening. Well, three cheers for them!!! I'll take their
recommendations over rumors at the Thanksgiving dinner table any
time. When it comes to my attachment to unusual beliefs, I'll just
stick to the Baha'i Faith, whose followers are told to respect the
educated and learned and not lapse into superstition, wishful
thinking, and "vain imaginings."
