---
title: What to Do After Democracy
category: in-progress
---

# What to Do After Democracy

Those of us raised in the United States are given, as our birthright,
a world view which generally reigns unquestioned, at least among
educated society. This world view has the following as its ideal:

* A capitalistic economy, based on "market-based" principles;

* A government which nominally democratic, and technically republican,
  based on partisan coalitions vying for government control through
  elections.

This two-faceted view of society is so widespread and accepted that
most educated citizens cannot imagine any form of
economy or government that could possibly be superior in nature to
this. Efforts at reform or improvement tend to be framed in accordance
with how conformant any improvements are with these two world
views. Indeed, one reason for "the end of history" narrative at the
completion of the 20th century was due to a lack of any realistic
compelling alernative for these world views.

From the point of view of The Baha'i Faith, both have much scope fore
improvement. In this paper, we will focus on society's current view on
civic governance. While the Baha'i Faith has much to say about economic
concerns, and there is certainly an interplay between the economic
system and civic government, we will consider issues of
economics out of the scope of this paper.(1)

One reason for this two-pronged world view is the complete lack of
appealing alternatives. While known alternatives to capitalism are
generally viewed as disagreeable and inefficient, known alternatives
to democracy are generally feared outright. It's difficult to find
working alternatives to market economies, but quite easy to find the
primary alternative to partisan representative democracies: the
antidemocratic kleptocracy. Indeed, for all of the alternatives of
democracy in the 20th century - communism, military dictatorships,
fascism - all of them had this same underlying dynamic of an
authoritarian ruler propped up by a favored class that worked to
ensure the stability of the system. Whether this favored class was
distinguished by membership in a political party, oligarchy, ethnic group or
the military, did not matter: the underlying mechanism was the
same. Whatever the situation, the outcome was predictably horrifying
for the citizens unfortunate enough to find themselves in an unfavored
class under such misrule. Indeed, much of the present concern with US
Government is the possiblity that the same thing could happen here
through a _herrenvolk_ corruption of our current system.

Perhaps as a result, alternatives to current forms of representative
democracy, be they parlimentiary, presidential or otherwise, are
rarely envisioned. While democracy has its problems, problems with
democracy as such are mainly aired by the extremely marginalized, or
alternatively, affluent or wealthy society members with no professed
concern for a just society. The good-government believers in
liberalism, while well aware of problems with democracy, are content in
their belief that democracy is "the worst form of government, except
for all the others." Attempts to improve government are generally
thought of only in terms of marginal structural fixes: eliminating
corporate bias, corruption and influence-buying, or governmental
modifications aimed at making the system more purely democratic.

## Democracy: The Need for a Way Forward

    I've said it before and I'll say it again. Democracy simply
    doesn't work.
        -- Kent Brockman (fictional character on _The Simpsons_)

Anyone who lived through the nineties in the US is probably familiar
with this quote, intended to be satirical. Unfortunately, those of us
living presently may be wondering if the animated narrator was playing it
straight. Despite the efforts of reformers, the state of government is
getting worse, as many democracies fall prey to the same intractable
problems:

* Easy corruption of the system by entrenched, monied interest;

* Obvious manipulation of popular will through crude propaganda against
  minority groups;

* Gridlock caused by unconsidered partisanship, entrenched by masses of
  voters that use the franchise to reward those in their on class and
  punish those outside of it;

* The elevation of incompetent or corrupt elected representatives
  based on "in-group" membership;
  
* The creation of disconnected bureaucracies that frequently must
  ignore popular will in the name of "getting something done";

* The formation of elite decision-making bodies that frequently have
  neither the skills nor the mandate to defend their decisions against
  propaganda by entrenched interests that benefit from the status quo;

* Vulnerability to majoritarian abuses of power;

* The ability of elected officials to subvert the system by rigging
  democratic institutions once they gain positions of power.

Many of these problems have been the signal signs of poorly
functioning governments throughout the developing world. While
defenders of liberalism have generally attributed such failures due to
lack of a tradition of democratic norms and imperialistic manipulation
by foreign powers, this does not explain the sudden appearance of these
problems throughout democracies in advanced economies where such norms
had been considered historically strong.

Defenders of both liberalism and democracy, therefore, have a
challenge: it seems they can either have a society in conformance with
liberal values, or one that values the ability of voters to chose
their representatives through majority vote. Current trends indicate
that having both of these at the same time are a happy coincidence,
since voters of all the nations frequently use their franchise to
elect representatives whose core political platform is to take a
hammer to said liberal values. It is time to consider a unpopular
thought: that the permanent, stable establishment of a
just governments may mean rethinking key structures in the forms of
representative democracy as they are present throughout the world.

One must start with an ideal: a government that involves all citizens
in a broad-based vision of self-government, guaranteeing justice and
equal freedoms for all; one that eliminates the flaws of
representative democracies while not repeating the mistakes that
doomed the flawed regimes democracy replaced, be they monarchical,
authoritarian, totalitarian, oligarchical or otherwise. To this, one
may look to the vision of the Baha'i Administrative Order.

As Baha'is, we belief the Baha'i model of governance can contribute
many positive elements in discussion of governance. While democratic
in operation, the Baha'i model presents several unusual features that
distinguish it markedly from normal democratic structures. Many of
these ideals are not new, but instead reflect some of the ideal of
other thinkers of democracy in the past. INdeed, many of these
ideas have strong parallels with recommendations by the "founding
fathers" of the US and the other enlightenment thinkers of democracy's
early days. Over time, many were discarded, some for reasons of
expedience; others, because they could not work in isolation from
other principles.

It must be acknowledged that there is a very reasonable fear for any
government that does not incorporate familiar democratic structures
such as political parties or uses them in an indirect manner (say, by
electing electors to actually select leaders). Movements to limit
democracy and public input have frequently been used by powerful
majorities as a way to exclude input from disfavored minorities or by
historically privileged groups to retain this privelege in the face of
public unpopularity. Yet this sort of "controlled democracy" need not be the
only alternative, and it is necessary to produce a vision of something
beyond democracy that remedies its flaws without introducing other
problems. One may disagree with this author's estimation of the state
of democracies throughout the world. What is not debateable is the
constant need of new ideas to ensure progress in this area.

## Participative Government: the Baha'i Alternative

    Leaders of religion, exponents of political theories, governors of
    human institutions, who at present are witnessing with perplexity
    and dismay the bankruptcy of their ideas, and the disintegration
    of their handiwork, would do well to turn their gaze to the
    Revelation of Baha'u'llah. (Shoghi Effendi, _World Order of
    Baha'u'llah_ 21-Mar-1930).

The World Order of Baha'u'llah, as spelled out by Shoghi Effendi, is
_sui generis_ among governing institutions. Its democratic makeup
frequently leads people to classify it as a democratic institution. As
such, it is seen to have all of the elements of a representational
democracy, with representatives (assemblies), executive offices, and
the normal functionaries.

From this point of view, then, it would not seem that the Baha'i Faith
has much to offer; it is yet another democratically-elected
institution. Yet it doesn't take much study of this structure to note
that, at least with respect to a representative democracy, there is
much that is unusual to Western eyes. Assembly members are
elected by plurality, not majority, with no runoff. There is no formal
"separation of powers." There is no system of political parties or
factions to organize people on the basis of comon interest. There are
no nominations or runoff elections. The representatives that are
elected are not held as responsible to the voters, which is just as
well, since in practice there is no way of knowing the way any
assembly person voted: minutes of meetings, while open and
available, are written in a way that does not identify the
speakers. There are no "Robert's Rules of Order" to keep
parliamentarians busy.

The problem is a misunderstanding of the governing structure, as set
forth in writings such as The World Order of Baha'u'llah. While the
Baha'i Faith uses "democratic methods," the Baha'i Faith is not
truly a democracy, at least not in the sense we are used to:

    This new-born Administrative Order incorporates within its
    structure certain elements which are to be found in each of the
    three recognized forms of secular government [democracy, despotism
    or aristocracy], without being in any sense a mere replica of any
    one of them, and without introducing within its machinery any of
    the objectionable features which they inherently possess.
       (Shoghi Effendi, The World Order of Baha'u'llah, p. 152)

What is the Baha'i Faith governance model, then? We are told that it
is a model for future governance of the human race, but if it is not a
democracy, what is it?

It is a form of _participative government_ for sure. In the west, we
generally think of participative government as meaning a
representative democracy. These representative democracies may take
different forms - some are ruled with a separate executive and
legislative branch, some with a parliament. But this hides the fact
that there is really very little variance in the structure of
western-style governance. Most of what we study in political science
applies to these forms of governance exactly, and such governments are
so dominant that even autocracies find it convenient to mimic the
institutions of such government, in spite of the fact that the
resulting assemblies rarely carry out any meaningful mandate. (After
all, if the government is superfluous, why spend time being creative
when you draw your consititution? Just copy a popular one and
go about ignoring it.)

In fact, the unusual points in Baha'i governance are not flaws, but
important features. A proper understanding of the Baha'i model must
identify these features so that they can be appreciated for possible
improvements on existing democratic decision-making. This paper will
show that the bulk of these unusual features, far from being due to
omissions, are intentional mechanisims, the central purpose of which
is to ensure that proper decisions are made that takes into account
the views of as broad a representation of the members of the Baha'i
Faith as possible. (2)

This paper will proceed as follows: an analysis of some key features
of the Baha'i governance will take much of the paper. After analysis,
the paper will discuss the improvements the Baha'i model offers in
both smaller-scale civic and volunteer organization, followed by
consideration of this model at the scale of the nation-state. In many
cases, these features are in fact not novel, but simply unfamiliar,
having been proposed by earlier writers of democracy and current
writers working toward much the same aim: improvment to democratic
decision-making. Where possible, this perspective will be provided on
these points.

# An Analysis of Key Baha'i Principles from the Writings

There are a number of key principles that underlie Baha'i
governance. While all of these are familiar to Baha'is, they are worth
identifying them explicitly. Many of these principles are unusual for
civic bodies, and all are worth examining.

Students of The Faith, including the bulk of Baha'is, are familiar
with these principles of Baha'i governance as laid laid forth in
Shoghi Effendi's _World Order of Baha'u'llah_. However, one must
realize this was not a latter-day innovation imposed upon the
teachings outlined by Baha'u'llah. Shoghi Effendi was at pains to
point out to believers that the most important of these principles
were restatements of principles enunciated by both Baha'u'llah and
'Abdu'l-Baha:

    The concentration of authority in the hands of the elected
    representatives of the believers; the necessity of the submission
    of every adherent of the Faith to the considered judgment of
    Baha'i Assemblies; His preference for unanimity in decision; the
    decisive character of the majority vote; and even the desirability
    for the exercise of close supervision over all Baha'i
    publications, have been sedulously instilled by Abdu'l-Baha, as
    evidenced by His authenticated and widely-scattered Tablets. (27-Feb-1929)

So, far from being inventions by Shoghi Effendi, the bulk of these features have
antecedents in writings by both Baha'u'llah and 'Abdu'l-Baha.

This section identifies a number of key governing principals, but does
not claim to be exhaustive or authoritative. In particular, many of
the religious aspects of Baha'i governments have been purposely
omitted due to scope of work (3). Rather, the goal of this list is
practical in nature: to serve as a summary of governing principles
that can be carried over to other secular governing
organizations. The hope is that it can contribute to a dialog on
improving existing governing structures, both at the secular level,
and at the level of governments of voluntary civic associations.

This section is extremely heavy on citations. These citations are
important for context. The primary purpose of this analysis was to
shed light on the nature of many of the unsual features of Baha'i
governance, and it is not possible to understand their intent without
reference to the writings that indicate the nature of these features.

**Decisions Made through Consultation, with Strong Preference for Unanimity**

Consultation is the central mechanism under which decisions are made
in the Baha'i community. Consultation is a consensus-oriented
decision-making process. It is a central feature of the Baha'i Faith,
lauded by its central figures as the ideal mechanism for justice:

    The heaven of divine wisdom is illumined with the two luminaries
    of consultation and compassion and the canopy of world order is
    upraised upon the two pillars of reward and punishment.

	(Baha'u'llah, Tablets of Baha'u'llah, p. 126) (The third
	Ishraq)

    The Great Being saith: The heaven of divine wisdom is illumined
    with the two luminaries of consultation and compassion. Take ye
    counsel together in all matters, inasmuch as consultation is the
    lamp of guidance which leadeth the way, and is the bestower of
    understanding.

	(Baha'u'llah, Tablets of Baha'u'llah, p. 168)

The core process of consultation is set forth at length in various
tablets. This excerpt from 'Abdu'l-Baha includes many important points:

    So they (members) must confer and consult in such a way that
    neither disagreement nor abhorrence may occur. When meeting for
    consultation, each must use perfect liberty in stating his views
    and unveiling the proof of his demonstration. If another
    contradicts him, he must not become excited because if there be no
    investigation or verification of questions and matters, the
    agreeable view will not be discovered neither understood. The
    brilliant light which comes from the collision of thoughts is the
    "lightener" of facts.

    If all views are in harmony at the end of a conference, it will be
    excellent; but if, God forbid! disagreement occurs, then the
    decision must be according to the greater number in harmony. If,
    after reaching the result, one or other of the members does not
    agree with it, neither of the other members nor any one must argue
    with or reproach him, but keep silence; then they will write to
    this Servant.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, Baha'i World Faith - Abdu'l-Baha Section, p. 406)

Ideally, consultation will result in a unanimous decision by the
deliberating assembly. If unanimity is not possible, it may be
necessary to make a decision by majority vote, but this is never a
preferred alternative. If a vote was taken, the decision is treated no
differently than any other unanimous decision; there is no "minority
report":

    "It is important to realize that the spirit of Bahá'í consultation
    is very different from that current in the decision-making
    processes of non-Bahá'í bodies.

    The ideal of Bahá'í consultation is to arrive at a unanimous
    decision. When this is not possible a vote must be taken. In the
    words of the beloved guardian: '... when they are called upon to
    arrive at a certain decision, they should, after dispassionate,
    anxious and cordial consultation, turn to God in prayer, and with
    earnestness and conviction and courage record their vote and abide
    by the voice of the majority, which we are told by the Master to
    be the voice of truth, never to be challenged and always to be
    whole-heartedly enforced.'

    As soon as a decision is reached it becomes the decision of the
    whole Assembly, not merely of those members who happened to be
    among the majority.

    When it is proposed to put a matter to the vote, a member of the
    Assembly may feel that there are additional facts or views which
    must be sought before he can make up his mind and intelligently
    vote on the proposition. He should express this feeling to the
    Assembly, and it is for the assembly to decide whether or no
    further consultation is needed before voting.

    Whenever it is decided to vote on a proposition all that is
    required is to ascertain how many of the members are in favour of
    it; if this is a majority of those present, the motion is carried;
    if it is minority, the motion is defeated. Thus the whole question
    of 'abstaining' does not arise in Bahá'í voting. A member who does
    not vote in favour of a proposition is, in effect, voting against
    it, even if at that moment he himself feels that he has been
    unable to make up his mind on the matter."

        (From a letter of the Universal House of Justice to the
        National Spiritual Assembly of Canada, March 6, 1970:
        Consultation: A Compilation, p. 12, February 1978)

	(Compilations, Lights of Guidance, p. 47)

Some further principles regarding consultation in the Baha'i governing
institutions:

    "In your letter of 4 April you enquire further about the
    principles governing the presence of a member of the National
    Assembly when a matter concerning him or her personally is being
    discussed.

    The first principle to bear in mind is that every member of an
    Assembly has an absolute and incontrovertible right to be present
    at every meeting of that body and to be fully informed of every
    matter coming before it.

    The second principle is that of detachment in consultation. The
    members of an Assembly must learn to express their views frankly,
    calmly, without passion or rancour. They must also learn to listen
    to the opinions of their fellow members without taking offence or
    belittling the views of another. Bahá'í consultation is  180  not
    an easy process. It requires love, kindliness, moral courage and
    humility. Thus no member should ever allow himself to be prevented
    from expressing frankly his view because it may offend a fellow
    member; and, realizing this, no member should take offence at
    another member's statements.  

    The Third principle is that if a believer feels that he has been
    done an injustice by the Assembly, he should appeal the decision
    in the normal way.

    (From a letter of the Universal House of Justice to the National
    Spiritual Assembly of Italy, August 26, 1965)

	(Compilations, Lights of Guidance, p. 179)

Naturally, with so much emphasis on consultation, it takes a central
part of the deliberating and decision-making process in the
legislative bodies of the Baha'i Administrative Order. Decisions are
not to be made through diktat by a majority. Instead, they should be
made through consultation. Regarding the function of elected
representatives:

    Their function is not to dictate, but to consult, and consult not
    only among themselves, but as much as possible with the friends
    whom they represent. They must regard themselves in no other light
    but that of chosen instruments for a more efficient and dignified
    presentation of the Cause of God.

	(Shoghi Effendi, Baha'i Administration, p. 64), emphasis added
	by this author.

Likewise, Baha'i communities have meetings where all members of the
Baha'i Faith may make recommendations and proposals for consideration
by these assemblies. These meetings are run through consultation:

    'Abdu'l-Bahá emphasized the importance of the spiritual and
    devotional character of these gatherings.  Shoghi Effendi, besides
    further elaborating the devotional and social aspects of the
    Feast, has developed the administrative element of such gatherings
    and, in systematically instituting the Feast, has provided for a
    period of consultation on the affairs of the Bahá'í community,
    including the sharing of news and messages.

	(Translation notes for The Kitab-i-Aqdas, p. 202)

Indeed, consultation is central, not only for governing institutions,
but for all other institutions as well: appointed institutions, ad-hoc
tasks forces and grassroots activities only indirectly answerable to
such institutions.

It should be noted that the spirit of consultation is as important as
the mechanics of the consultation. Ordinary political discourse
commonplace is considered far from the ideal. 'Abdu'l-Baha' commented
on this distinction, by contrasting consultation against a discussion
he viewed in a parliamentary seesion:

    In this Cause consultation is of vital importance, but spiritual
    conference and not the mere voicing of personal views is
    intended. In France I was present at a session of the senate, but
    the experience was not impressive. Parliamentary procedure should
    have for its object the attainment of the light of truth upon
    questions presented and not furnish a battleground for opposition
    and self-opinion. Antagonism and contradiction are unfortunate and
    always destructive to truth. In the parliamentary meeting
    mentioned, altercation and useless quibbling were frequent; the
    result, mostly confusion and turmoil; even in one instance a
    physical encounter took place between two members. It was not
    consultation but comedy.

    The purpose is to emphasize the statement that consultation must
    have for its object the investigation of truth. He who expresses
    an opinion should not voice it as correct and right but set it
    forth as a contribution to the consensus of opinion, for the light
    of reality becomes apparent when two opinions coincide. A spark is
    produced when flint and steel come together. Man should weigh his
    opinions with the utmost serenity, calmness and composure. Before
    expressing his own views he should carefully consider the views
    already advanced by others. If he finds that a previously
    expressed opinion is more true and worthy, he should accept it
    immediately and not willfully hold to an opinion of his own. By
    this excellent method he endeavors to arrive at unity and
    truth. Opposition and division are deplorable. It is better then
    to have the opinion of a wise, sagacious man; otherwise,
    contradiction and altercation, in which varied and divergent views
    are presented, will make it necessary for a judicial body to
    render decision upon the question. Even a majority opinion or
    consensus may be incorrect. A thousand people may hold to one view
    and be mistaken, whereas one sagacious person may be
    right. Therefore, true consultation is spiritual conference in the
    attitude  73  and atmosphere of love. Members must love each other
    in the spirit of fellowship in order that good results may be
    forthcoming. Love and fellowship are the foundation.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, The Promulgation of Universal Peace)

As indicated in many quotes above, the central purpose of consultation
is not a drive for a premature consensus, but a frank airing of all
views and viewpoints, ideally divoriced from uninformed opinion or
preconceived notions. Disagreements, rather than being supressed, must
be aired freely; however, disagreements should never lapse into
argumentation or disrespect. Baha'is believe that proper consultation
requires an attitude best described as "spritual" to ensure the right
decisions are made:

    There are spiritual principles, or what some call human values, by
    which solutions can be found for every social problem. Any
    well-intentioned group can in a general sense devise practical
    solutions to its problems, but good intentions and practical
    knowledge are usually not enough. The essential merit of spiritual
    principle is that it not only presents a perspective which
    harmonizes with that which is immanent in human nature, it also
    induces an attitude, a dynamic, a will, an aspiration, which
    facilitate the discovery and implementation of practical
    measures. Leaders of government and all in authority would be well
    served in their efforts to solve problems if they would first seek
    to identify the principles involved and then be guided by them.

    The Universal House of Justice, in The Promise of World Peace, p. 28

	(Compilations, NSA USA - Developing Distinctive Baha'i Communities)

As such, the effectiveness of consultation depends upon the nature of
the interactions and respectful attitude of all of the
participants. This being the case, it is presumed that assemblies are
capable of discussing things in an ordered manner without unnecessary
formalization: 

    Such systems as "Robert's Rules of Order" have no authority in
    Bahá'í consultation. Each Assembly should agree on the details
    necessary for maintaining an orderly flow of consultation and
    should revise them as required.

	(Compilations, NSA USA - Developing Distinctive Baha'i Communities)

Decisions made in consultation are never considered truly final, in
that new information may come to light that forces reconsideration of
the decision. But without such information, believers are asked to let
the decision stand without further argument, to ensure that it has
time to take efect and be evaluated.

    A believer can ask the Assembly why they made a certain decision
    and politely request them to reconsider. But then he must leave it
    at that, and not go on disrupting local affairs through insisting
    on his own views. This applies to an Assembly member as well.
    
    Written on behalf of Shoghi Effendi, in The Local Spiritual
    Assembly, p. 27

In case of abuse, there is a mechanism for appeal. In particular, if
someone is unsatisfied about a decision made, particularly one
involving infringement of one's rights or improper procedures, the
members are encouraged to appeal to a higher authority if it is not
possible to get satisfaction from the assembly:

    Whenever there is any infringement of Bahá'í rights, or lapse in
    the proper procedure, the friends should take the matter up with
    the Assembly concerned, and, if not satisfied, then with the
    National Spiritual Assembly. This is both their privilege and
    their duty.

        Shoghi Effendi, July 10, 1942, enclosed with a letter written
        on behalf of the Universal House of Justice, dated January 1,
        1989

	(Compilations, NSA USA - Developing Distinctive Baha'i Communities)

Consultation is so central to the Baha'i Faith, and has been found so
helpful in areas outside of the Baha'i Faith, that this is probably
the feature of the Baha'i Faith most eagerly adopted by civic
organizations outside of the faith. However, there are many more
features that merit consideration.

**Governing Representatives Have No Constituency**

The reasons given for elections for governing bodies are very clear
and were outlined very early in the history of the Baha'i Faith. Per
'Abdu'l-Baha:

    In the present writer's view it would be preferable if the
    election of nonpermanent members of consultative assemblies in
    sovereign states should be dependent on the will and choice of the
    people. For elected representatives will on this account be
    somewhat inclined to exercise justice, lest their reputation
    suffer and they fall into disfavor with the public.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, The Secret of Divine Civilization, p. 23)

These elected assemblies at the varying levels are conducted to legislate. Much
like in parliamentary systems, there is no formally separate executive to
carry out their orders. However, the elected persons are not to be
though of as representatives. Per Shoghi Effendi:
    
    The Administrative Order of the Faith of Baha'u'llah must in no
    wise be regarded as purely democratic in character inasmuch as the
    basic assumption which requires all democracies to depend
    fundamentally upon getting their mandate from the people is
    altogether lacking in this Dispensation. In the conduct of the
    administrative affairs of the Faith, in the enactment of the
    legislation necessary to supplement the laws of the Kitab-i-Aqdas,
    the members of the Universal House of Justice, it should be borne
    in mind, are not, as Baha'u'llah's utterances clearly imply,
    responsible to those whom they represent, nor are they allowed to
    be governed by the feelings, the general opinion, and even the
    convictions of the mass of the faithful, or of those who directly
    elect them.

Rather, they are elected to come to a correct decision:

    They are to follow, in a prayerful attitude, the
    dictates and promptings of their conscience.

Additionally, in these consultations, elected assembly members are
told to disregard their own inclinations:

    The members of these Assemblies, on their part, must disregard
    utterly their own likes and dislikes, their personal interests and
    inclinations, and concentrate their minds upon those measures that
    will conduce to the welfare and happiness of the Baha'i Community
    and promote the common weal.

In other words, even should one vote for assembly members with an eye
toward electing assembly members whose views they prefer, this
strategy would be ineffective, as a dutiful assembly member would not
allow his own inclinations to interfere with decisions.

Contrariwise, the conditions of the community are indeed important,
and must inform all deliberations. Continuing, Shoghi Effendi elaborates:

    They may, indeed they must, acquaint themselves with the
    conditions prevailing among the community, must weigh
    dispassionately in their minds the merits of any case presented
    for their consideration, but must reserve for themselves the right
    of an unfettered decision. (WOB 8-Feb-1934)

Assembly members must not make their decision in isolation from the
community, but should rather be very informed with any information
community members present:

    Their function [elected representatives] is not to dictate, but to
    consult, and consult not only among themselves, but as much as
    possible with the friends whom they represent.

And futher,

    They must, at all times, avoid the spirit of exclusiveness, the
    atmosphere of secrecy, free themselves from a domineering
    attitude, and banish all forms of prejudice and passion from their
    deliberations. They should, within the limits of wise discretion,
    take the friends into their confidence, acquaint them with their
    plans, share with them their problems and anxieties, and seek
    their advice and counsel.

Indeed, the solicitaiton of advice from other Baha'is and the
cultivation of personal initiatives is one of the requirements of
anyone serving on these elcted bodies:

    Let it be made clear to every inquiring reader that among the most
    outstanding and sacred duties incumbent upon those who have been
    called upon to initiate, direct and coordinate the affairs of the
    Cause, are those that require them to win by every means in their
    power the confidence and affection of those whom it is their
    privilege to serve. Theirs is the duty to investigate and acquaint
    themselves with the considered views, the prevailing sentiments,
    the personal convictions of those whose welfare it is their solemn
    obligation to promote. Theirs is the duty to purge once for all
    their deliberations and the general conduct of their affairs from
    that air of self-contained aloofness, from the suspicion of
    secrecy, the stifling atmosphere of dictatorial assertiveness, in
    short, from every word and deed that might savor of partiality,
    self-centeredness and prejudice. Theirs is the duty, while
    retaining the sacred and exclusive right of final decision in
    their hands, to invite discussion, provide information, ventilate
    grievances, welcome advice from even the most humble and
    insignificant members of the Baha'i family, expose their motives,
    set forth their plans, justify their actions, revise if necessary
    their verdict, foster the spirit of individual initiative and
    enterprise, and fortify the sense of interdependence and
    co-partnership, of understanding and mutual confidence between
    them on one hand and all local Assemblies and individual believers
    on the other. (BA 18-Oct-1927)

**Voting Based on Character and Competency Rather than Political
  Positions; Making This Determination Requires Community Involvement**

Civic virtues are particularly important among those empowered in the
government itself; some of this has already been alluded to in the
section on the duty of representatives. Being that representatives are
responsible to no one except themselves (and each other, to some
extent), all representatives must be of ideal moral calibre.

This facet of government is described at length in 'Abdu'l-Baha's
political work _The Secret of Divine Civilization_, the only
book-length work in the Baha'i Faith dedicated to political
manners. In it, very little time is spent on recommending concrete
aspects of governance; in fact, very few of the the specific
recommendations in this paper are mentioned! However, much is written
about the moral qualifications necessary of all those who serve,
legislate and work for and on behalf of the civic government. Passages
like this are typical:

    While the setting up of parliaments, the organizing of assemblies
    of consultation, constitutes the very foundation and bedrock of
    government, there are several essential requirements which these
    institutions must fulfill. First, the elected members must be
    righteous, God-fearing, high-minded, incorruptible. Second, they
    must be fully cognizant, in every particular, of the laws of God,
    informed as to the highest principles of law, versed in the rules
    which govern the management of internal affairs and the conduct of
    foreign relations, skilled in the useful arts of civilization, and
    content with their lawful emoluments.

    Let it not be imagined that members of this type would be
    impossible to find. Through the grace of God and His chosen ones,
    and the high endeavors of the devoted and the consecrated, every
    difficulty can be easily resolved, every problem however complex
    will prove simpler than blinking an eye.  18 

    If, however, the members of these consultative assemblies are
    inferior, ignorant, uninformed of the laws of government and
    administration, unwise, of low aim, indifferent, idle,
    self-seeking, no benefit will accrue from the organizing of such
    bodies.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, The Secret of Divine Civilization, p. 17)

Later, he writes to the same effect:

    It is unquestionable that the object in establishing parliaments
    is to bring about justice and righteousness, but everything hinges
    on the efforts of the elected representatives. If their intention
    is sincere, desirable results and unforeseen improvements will be
    forthcoming; if not, it is certain that the whole thing will be
    meaningless, the country will come to a standstill and public
    affairs will continuously deteriorate. "I see a thousand builders
    unequal to one subverter; what then of the one builder who is
    followed by a thousand subverters?"

	(Abdu'l-Baha, The Secret of Divine Civilization, p. 22)

What is notable is not the fact that these these are recommended, but
that these qualities are the _primary_ recommendations, and their lack
is a disqualifying factor. Naturally, these edits carry over to
qualities expected of those elcted to Baha'i administration; these are
based on character and capability rather than based on known
positions. Shoghi Effendi, writing of the election of delegates to the
national conventions, stated:

    ... it is incumbent upon the chosen delegates to consider without
    the least trace of passion and prejudice, and irrespective of any
    material consideration, the names of only those who can best
    combine the necessary qualities of unquestioned loyalty, of
    selfless devotion, of a well-trained mind, of recognized ability
    and mature experience. (BA 3-Jun-1925)

Other Baha'i elections are to be approached in a similar manner:

    The electors... must prayerfull and devotedly and after meditation
    and refletion elect faithful, sincere, experienced, capable and
    competent souls who are worthy of membership...

    Due regard must be paid to their actual capacity and presennt
    attainments...

    They should consider without the least trace of passion and
    prejudice, and irrespective of any material consideration, the
    names of only those who can best combine the necessary qualities
    of unquestioned loyalty, of selfless devotion, of a well-trained
    mind, of recognized ability and mature experience.

        (Translated from Persian letters from Shoghi Effendi, quoted
        from _The American Baha'i_ July/Aug 2018)

The voters should be careful to select their votes with an eye toward
electing a body that is representative of the diversity of the
community. Voters should not draw from a "favored segment," but must
vote with an eye toward having broad representation of the electorate:

    From among the pool of those whom the elector believes to be
    qualified to serve, selection should be made with due
    consideration given to such other factors as age distribution,
    diversity, and gender.
        (Letter from the Universal House of Justice to the Baha'is of
        the world, 25-Mar-2007)

Interestingly, Shoghi Effendi indicates elsewhere the necessity of
Baha'is to remain active in their communities to ensure they are
familiar enough with the community members to cast an informed vote.

    To be able to make a wise choice at the election time, it is
    necessary for him to be in close and continued contact with all
    local activities, be they teaching, administrative or otherwise,
    and to fully and whole-heartedly participate in the affairs of the
    local as well as national committees and assemblies in his
    country. It is only in this way that a believer can develop a true
    social consciousness and acquire a true sense of responsibility in
    matters affecting the interests of the Cause.
        (Shoghi Effendi, quoted in a letter from the Universal House
        of Justice to the Baha'is of the world, 25-Mar-2007)

In this manner, activity in the community is a precondition of making
an informed vote.

**Avoidance of Unitary Executive**

In contemporary governance, right down to the smallest level, there is
usually a "leader." This person, be it the prime minister, president,
mayor or chief executive, is generally the one person who is looked to
as the head of government.

No such person exists in any elected Baha'i institution (4). While these
institutions have their own officers, with their own responsibilities;
e.g. a permanent chair of the meetings, a treasurer, and so
forth, these offices should not be taken as signaling someone is the
"leader" of that institution.

To make this distinction even more concrete, my understanding (based
on a visit to Haifa in 2002) is that the chairmanship of the Universal
House of Justice rotates between its members. A notable point of
interest is the way in which these officers are selected. They are
voted on by the elected bodies themselves, and officer selection
requires an actual election by the majority, without nominations. This
can frequently requires several rounds of balloting.

As such, there is a culture that seeks to avoid elevating those in the
elected bodies as being higher rank than other members of the Baha'i
Faith, in spite of their position of responsibility. This is in marked
contrast to popular culture's vision of leadership that generally
looks at chief executives as a sort of "king" who leads the
nation. Indeed, it is the polar opposite of the authoritarian or
fascist ideal, which uses a cult of personality to elevate a leader
beyond questioning.

Ironically, the Baha'i writings have a special regard for kingship,
in a very specific way: Baha'u'llah himself seemed particularly
pleased with nations such as Great Britian which had devised ways of
keeping a royalty as a national symbol while limiting its
powers. However, even this may be reading too much into this:
Baha'u'llah later in the same writing references the "two signs of the
maturity of mankind," one of which is that no man will be willing to
bear the weight of kingship.

**Complete Ban on Campaigning, Electioneering, Block Voting and
  Political Parties**

Elections are to be based on the moral and character qualifications of
the candidates, and the entire environment in which voting takes place
is intended to make it difficult to take political considerations into
account when making this decision. Political parties are seen as
particularly pernicious, to such an extent that Baha'is are not even
allowed to belong to such organizations in their civic duties. Again,
Shoghi Effendi:

    Let them exercise the utmost vigilance so that the elections are
    carried out freely, universally and by secret ballot. Any form of
    intrigue, deception, collusion and compulsion must be stopped and
    is forbidden.

    Beware, beware lest the foul odour of the parties and
    peoples... and their pernicious methods such as intrigues, party
    politics and propaganda - practices which are abhorrent even in
    name - should ever reach the Baha'i community, exercise any
    influence whatsoever upon the friends and thus bring all
    spirituality to naught. The friends should, through their
    devotion, love, loualty and altruism, abolish these evil
    practices, not imitate them. It is only after the friends
    completely ignore and sanctify themselves from these evils, that
    the spirit of God can penetrate and operate in the body of
    humanity, and in the Baha'i community.

In such an environment, not only is voting based on expressed
positions discouraged, but it is difficult to do so in an informed
manner even if one wishes to do so. In fact, not only is
electioneering frowned upon, it is not considered seemly to even
mention individuals in connection with elected posts:

    One's vote should be kept confidential. It is not permissible to
    make any reference whatsoever to individual names. The friends
    must avoid the evil methods and detestable practices of the
    politicians. They must turn completely to God, and with a purity
    of motive, a freedom of spirit and a sanctity of heart,
    participate in the elections; otherwise the outcome will be chaos
    and confusion, serious difficulties will ensue, mischief will
    abound and the confirmation of God will be cut off.

    (Shoghi Effendi, translation of letter dated January 16, 1932, to
    Persian believers in "Extracts from the Guardian's Letters on the
    Spiritual Character of Bahá'í Elections," p. 2; from NSA USA
    _Developing Distinctive Baha'i Communities_)

**Necessity of Proper Control of Election Environment**

Baha'i voting takes place in a prayerful, reverent atmosphere. This is
not novel; civic institutions frequently attempt to generate the same
well-ordered atmosphere. In Baha'i elections, there is an explicitly
spiritual atmosphere that always accompanies such activity. Indeed,
this must inform the attitude of the voter:

    On the election day, the firends must whole-heartedly participate
    in the elections, in unity and amity, turning their hearts to God,
    detached from all things but Him, seeking His guidance and
    supplicating His aid and bounty.
        (Letter written on behalf of Shoghi Effendi 27-Feb-1923)

Fortunately, the US nation in which this author resides still seems to
have enough respect for the voting process to make sure that most
polling areas are orderly and respectful. While this may fail in some
places, at least the ideal is respected.

**Plurality Voting for Governing Representatives, Without Nominations**

As regards to plurality voting and voting without nominations: while
Baha'is are used to doing this, it is worth pointing out exactly how
novel this is. It is also not an unchangeable requirement. It is what
was settled on during the early Assembly formation prior even to
Shoghi Effendi:

    I have consequently refrained from establishing a settled and
    uniform procedure for the election of the Assemblies of the East
    and the West, leaving them free to pursue their own methods of
    procedure which in most cases had been instituted and practiced
    during the last two decades of the life of Abdu'l-Baha.

    The general practice prevailing throughout the East is the one
    based upon the principle of plurality rather than absolute
    majority, whereby those candidates that have obtained the highest
    number of votes, irrespective of the fact whether they command an
    absolute majority of the votes cast or not, are automatically and
    definitely elected. It has been felt, with no little
    justification, that this method, admittedly disadvantageous in its
    disregard of the principle that requires that each elected member
    must secure a majority of the votes cast, does away on the other
    hand with the more serious disadvantage of restricting the freedom
    of the elector who, unhampered and unconstrained by electoral
    necessities, is called upon to vote for none but those whom prayer
    and reflection have inspired him to uphold. Moreover, the practice
    of nomination, so detrimental to the atmosphere of a silent and
    prayerful election, is viewed with mistrust inasmuch as it gives
    the right to the majority of a body that, in itself under the
    present circumstances, often constitutes a minority of all the
    elected delegates, to deny that God-given right of every elector
    to vote only in favor of those who he is conscientiously convinced
    are the most worthy candidates. Should this simple system be
    provisionally adopted, it would safeguard the spiritual principle
    of the unfettered freedom of the voter, who will thus preserve
    intact the sanctity of the choice he first made. It would avoid
    the inconvenience of securing advance nominations from absent
    delegates, and the impracticality of associating them with the
    assembled electors in the subsequent ballots that are often
    required to meet the exigencies of majority vote.

Note that this is made primarily for reasons of "freedom of
conscience." There are other reasons for this that will be described
later. Interestingly, Shoghi Effendi did not dictate this process, but
suggested it to the community:

    I would recommend these observations to your earnest
    consideration, and whatever decision you arrive at, all local
    Assemblies and individual believers, I am certain, will uphold,
    for their spiritual obligation and privilege is not only to
    consult freely and frequently with the National Spiritual
    Assembly, but to uphold as well with <p137> confidence and
    cheerfulness whatever is the considered verdict of their national
    representatives. (BA 27-May-1926)

To this author, these arrangements seem to have been provisional in
nature. However, I am aware of no effort by the institutions to ever
change this, and this author certainly cannot ever recall this subject
ever being brought up in a consultation! Since Shoghi Effendy did not
indicate this as a requirement, one supposes the Universal House of Justice
is free to change such practices. Note that any such change will be provisional,
as it could later be reversed. Perhaps the reason Shoghi Effendi
stated this was because he wished it to take this form initially, but
not tie the hands of the Universal House of Justice in the future. In
any case, it remains the law throughout the Baha'i community.

In any event, Shoghi Effendi clearly favored this, particularly the
lack of nominations:

    As to the practice of nomination on Bahá'í elections, this the
    Guardian firmly believes to be in fundamental dis-accord with the
    spirit which should animate and direct all elections held by the
    Bahá'ís, be they of a local or national character and
    importance. It is, indeed, the absence of such a practice that
    constitutes the distinguishing feature and the marked superiority
    of the Bahá'í electoral methods over those commonly associated
    with political parties and factions. The practice of nomination
    being thus contrary to the spirit of Bahá'í Administration should
    be totally discarded by all the friends. For otherwise the freedom
    of the Bahá'í elector in choosing the members of any Bahá'í
    Assembly will be seriously endangered leaving the way open for the
    domination of personalities. Not only that; but the mere act of
    nomination leads eventually to the formation of parties a thing
    which is totally alien to the spirit of the Cause.

       (From a letter written on behalf of Shoghi Effendi to an
       individual believer, February 4, 1935; quoted in _Lights of
       Guidance_, p. 9)

As regards to why plurality is favored, one possibility may be to guarantee
a representation of a diverse set of elected officials.  Note the
emphasis placed on electors to vote for representatives that represent
the diversity of the community. While there is no concept of "identity
politics," electors cannot be unaware of the need to have
representation of the diversity of the community. Indeed, Shoghi
Effendi has stated that in the case of a tie vote in an election, if
one person represents a "minority," the tie should be decided in favor
of that person:

    ... every organized community enlisted under the banner of
    Bahá'u'lláh should feel it to be its first and inescapable
    obligation to nurture, encourage, and safeguard every minority
    belonging to any Faith, race, class or nation within it. So great
    and vital is this principle that in such circumstances as when an
    equal number of ballots have been cast in an election, or where
    the qualifications for any office are balanced as between the
    various races, Faiths or nationalities within the community
    priority should unhesitatingly be accorded the party representing
    the minority and this for no other reason except to stimulate and
    encourage it and afford it an opportunity to further the interests
    of the community.

	(Shoghi Effendi, _The Advent of Divine Justice_ pp. 28-29)


**Immutability of Certain Features Combined With Ease of Changing
  Governing Structures**

Most governing bodies have constitutions. Constitutions are important
because they describe not only how the structure of government, but
how it may change in the future in an ordered manner.

The Baha'i Faith is unusual from this respect. The Universal House of
Justice has a constitution. The national bodies generally have their
own constitutions as well, to bring them in conformance with secular
codes. However, what is unusual is the process for change.

* Features laid down by the certain central figures of The Faith
  cannot be changed, as they are considered central to The Faith
  itself. This writing has concentrated mainly on those features. All of
  these features, except, arguably, certain points in the election
  process, are fixed and unchangeable.

* Anything else is flexible and can be changed through a
  majority vote by the primary governing body (the Universal House of
  Justice).

This is noteable because if you limit your concerns only those bodies
completely described by the writings of the central figures, such
writings are far too embryonic to completely elaborate the full
governing structure. For instance, the assemblies are legislative, and
perhaps to some extent, judicial arms of government. Discussion of an
executive branch is entirely lacking. As a result, even medium-sized
Baha'i assemblies are supplimented with various committees and groups
that carry out assembly decisions. All of these are created by the
elected assemblies and can be changed as seen fit by those assemblies.
This includes the supreme institutions of the Baha'i Faith, which has
brought into being institutions such as the appointed counselors and
auxiliary boards, regional institutions, and recently, the various
learning institutions. As such, the full scope of Baha'i governance is
far more complex than that laid down in this writing.

The result is the ability to change governing institutions easily,
based on the needs of the day. Shoghi Effendi has written with respect
to this:

    ... whatever is deemed necessary to incorporate into it in order
    to keep it in the forefront of all progressive movements, can,
    according to the provisions made by Baha'u'llah, be safely
    embodied therein. To this testify the words of Baha'u'llah, as
    recorded in the Eighth Leaf of the exalted Paradise: "It is
    incumbent upon the Trustees of the House of Justice to take
    counsel together regarding those things which have not outwardly
    been revealed in the Book, and to enforce that which is agreeable
    to them. God will verily inspire them with whatsoever He willeth,
    and He, verily, is the Provider, the Omniscient." Not only has the
    House of Justice been invested by Baha'u'llah with the authority
    to legislate whatsoever has not been explicitly and outwardly
    recorded in His holy Writ, upon it has also been conferred by the
    Will and Testament of Abdu'l-Baha the right and power to abrogate,
    according to the changes and requirements of the time, whatever
    has been already enacted and enforced by a preceding House of
    Justice. (21-Mar-1930)

So there is no amendment process, as such; the core principles and
certain elements are fixed and unchangeable, but everything in their
implementation may be changed as a regular act of law.

**Emphasis on Universal Participation in the Franchise**

It is seen as a mandate to ensure as close to universal participation
in the franchise as possible:

    The universal participation of the blievers in every aspect of the
    faith... will endow the Baha'i community with such strenght that
    it can overcome the forces of spiritual disintegration which are
    engulfing the non-Baha'i world, and can become an ociean of
    oneness that will cover the face of the planet.

        (letter from the Universal House of Justice to the followers
        of Baha'u'llah in every land, 29-Dec-1970)

In particular, all Baha'is "in good standing" are encouraged to take
part in deliberations of The Faith and exercise their voting
franchise. Absentee voting is accepted as a matter of course. This is
a marked contrast to secular governance, where it is often felt
politically acceptable to make it harder for certain segments of
society to exercise the franchise.

There are, of course, exceptions to this. "Loss of voting rights" is a
sanction sometimes applied to Baha'is, but these are for sactions of a
serious matter. It seems evident that it is impermissible to revoke
voting rights or make it difficult to vote simply because one is in a
group disfavored by the governing authorities. This is a far cry from
models of current civic governance, which are frequently corrupted by
the desire to "cherry pick" the voters that select an elected
representative.

**Indirect Election of Secondary and Tertiary Representatives**

The local assemblies are elected through direct elections by all
community members in good standing. Not only are such members directly
elected, but they get a steady stream of input from the community in
the form of resolutions and recommendations from the nineteen-day
feast.

However, at the level of the secondary (national) and tertiary (House
of Justice) levels, the bodies are elected through indirect
elections. This is laid out in Abdu'l-Baha's Will and Testament:

    And now, concerning the House of Justice which God hath ordained
    as the source of all good and freed from all error, it must be
    elected by universal suffrage, that is, by the believers... By
    this House is meant the Universal House of Justice, that is, in
    all countries, a secondary House of Justice must be instituted,
    and these secondary Houses of Justice must elect the members of
    the Universal one. (WTAB)

These secondary Houses of Justice themselves are elected by delegates,
but these delegates represent districts based on proportional
representation, rather than by assembly. Per Shoghi Effendi:

    ...were the local
    Spiritual Assemblies, the number of whose members is strictly
    confined to <p85> nine, to elect directly the members of the
    National Spiritual Assembly -- thus maintaining the principle of a
    three-stage election -- all Baha'i localities, which must
    necessarily differ in numerical strength, would then have to share
    equally in the election of the National Spiritual Assembly -- a
    practice which would be contrary to fairness and
    justice. (BA 12-May-1925)

This is not happenstance; it appears Abdu'l-Baha himself was drawn
towards indirect elections for positions of importance, even civic
governments. Consider this excerpt, from _Star of the West_:

   Someone else asked regarding election and whether the country
   should be ruled by the people or by the wise ones among the people.
   
   'Abdu'l-Bahá answered: "It is evident that it is better if the
   people elect the noble ones among them, and then these elect the
   president of the republic. That is to say, the president should be
   the elect of the elect, because the public in general are not as
   well informed as they should be in regard to political affairs. The
   common people follow fame. In reality, whatever affair the wise
   people desire to execute, the common people agree to. The affairs
   should be in the hands of the wise and not of the common
   people. But the wise people must be in the utmost faithfulness and
   sincerity of purpose; they must serve all the people, and protect
   and safeguard their welfare. Consider, if you put the general
   affairs into the hands of the common people they will be ruined. If
   you put all the work into the hands of the labourer the house will
   not be built. A wise architect is needed. The work is done by the
   architect, but the common labourer suffers the hardships. The
   general draws the map of war, but the common people do the
   fighting. We cannot give them the map. Is it possible to leave a
   regiment in the hands of a soldier? But if we want to be victorious
   and conquerors, a wise, experienced person must be made commander."

	(SOW - Star of the West, Star of the West -  4)

**Limited Transparency in Deliberations**

Minutes of meetings are kept, but the courses of deliberations are
held in confidence and are not released. The reason is to ensure that
Baha'is express themselves freely:

    Let us also remember that at the very root of the Cause lies the
    principle of the undoubted right of the individual to
    self-expression, his freedom to declare his conscience and set
    forth his views. (BA 23-Feb-1924)

For this reason, it is generally not possible for non-Baha'is to
observe the deliberations of a governing body during
deliberations. Indeed, other Baha'is are generally not invited into
these deliberations, unless they specifically are being consulted with
on a matter of joint concern. This author clearly remembers from his
Baha'i prilgrimage the light outside the chamber where the Universal
House of Justice does its deliberations; when the light is on,
deliberations have begun, and one cannot enter the chamber then.

Minutes are to be kept to justify decisions and provide limited
transparency into the reasons for assembly decisions; they are not to
be used to identify who has expressed a particular view. See the
following reference regarding the meetings of a National Spiritual
Assembly:

    The purpose of the minutes is to record the action of the Assembly
    with sufficient back-ground information so that one reading the
    minutes will understand the reason for the action. National
    Assemblies may find it helpful if the background and the action
    are separated and not typed together. On the other hand, minutes
    should not be a verbatim report of the National Assembly meeting,
    and *it is not the purpose of the minutes to record the views of
    individual members. Names of individual making motions need not be
    recorded.* Names should be included, however, whenever required
    to make clear the assignments of persons responsible for
    actions."

        (From a letter of the Universal House of Justice to all
        National Spiritual Assemblies, May 27, 1970; emphasis by editor)

	(Compilations, Lights of Guidance, p. 30)

Note that this in no way means that governing bodies can use this as
an excuse to make decision-making opaque or paper over issues that
should be consulted on with the general community:

    Every institution in the Faith has certain matters which it
    considers should be kept confidential, and any member who is privy
    to such confidential information is obliged to preserve the
    confidentiality within the institution where he learned it. Such
    matters, however, are but a small portion of the business of any
    Bahá'í institution. Most subjects dealt with are of common
    interest and can be discussed openly with anyone. **Where no
    confidentiality is involved the institutions must strive to avoid
    the stifling atmosphere of secrecy**; on the other hand, every
    believer must know that he can confide a personal problem to an
    institution of the Faith, with the assurance that knowledge of the
    matter will remain confidential.

    Within the above general guideline, National Assemblies are free
    to adopt whatever provisions they deem necessary, suitable to the
    needs of their community, without creating unnecessary censorship
    on the channel of communication with the friends.

        (1 January 1984 on behalf of the Universal House of Justice to
        a National Spiritual Assembly, quoted in letter of 1996 Aug
        02, Confidentiality and Spiritual Assemblies, p. 2. Emphasis
        added by the editor)

**Emphasis on Decentralization and Federalism**

As much as possible, the secondary Houses of Justice should be
independent as possible, from interference from any other governing body:

    Moreover, the central principle guiding for the present
    the administration of the Cause has been to make the Baha'i
    National Spiritual Assemblies as independent as possible in the
    conduct of such affairs as fall within their province, and to
    lessen the hampering influence of any institution within their
    jurisdiction that might, whether directly or indirectly, impair
    their authority and prestige. (BA 12-May-1925)

While the Universal House of Justice remains the final authority, this
particular passage from Shoghi Effendi seems to warn against an
excessive involvement which would "hamper" the secondary institutions.

Likewise the secondary institutions must maintain their own balance:

    They should, within the limits imposed upon them by present-day
    circumstances, endeavor to maintain the balance in such a manner
    that the evils of over-centralization which clog, confuse and in
    the long run depreciate the value of the Baha'i services rendered
    shall on one hand be entirely avoided, and on the other the perils
    of utter decentralization with the consequent lapse of governing
    authority from the hands of the national representatives of the
    believers definitely averted. (BA 18-Oct-1927)

A similar tradeoff is given in the use of committees and andvisory
bodies in the same letter, advising them not to grant "undue
discretion to bodies that should be regarded in no other light than
that of expert advisers and executive assistants." But the primary
point is given: centralization is a problem.

In general, however, this is a point of moderation, and there is
certainly no ability of Local Spiritual Assemblies to act
independently without review. This is a matter of principle, not
pragmatics.

On the other hand, elected assemblies may not delegate their own
decision-making powers to their own appointed committees. For
instance, the following was written with respect to a national body:

    Any tendencies towards decentralization, or the delegation of
    authority to any person or body to make decisions on matters which
    directly and solely concern the National Spiritual Assembly
    itself, would be harmful and should be checked at the very outset.

        (From a letter dated 28 January 1939 written on behalf of
        Shoghi Effendi to the National Spiritual Assembly of the
        United States and Canada)

In particular, the appeals process means that decisions of local
assemblies may always be overruled by a national assembly, and that of
a national assembly by the Universal House of Justice. So from this
point of view, this is a subsidiary relationship rather than one of
equality. However, in practice, the bulk of all ordinary decisions are
made at the lowest level practical.

**No Referendum Process**

There is no referendum process. In spite of the importance of
community consultation, all recommendations to the assembly must be
discussed and approved by the assembly. They cannot abdicate their
role of deliberation and discussion to a majority vote on an issue.

When placed in the context of Baha'i governance, this particular
limitation makes more sense. The purpose of the elected institutions
is to ensure that an elected group of people representing the
community come to an informed decision among themselves. When it is
the case that the community itself comes to a particular decision
through consultation and wishes the elected body to act on it through
recommendation, it is entirely likely that the elected body may do
just that. But experience has shown that the majority referendum
process can be corrupted in a number of ways. It is not a requirement
that initiatives come from the elected institutions; in fact, it is
expected that many of the initiatives are themselves products of the
community that exected institutions simply provide feedback
on. However, one critical purpose of this institution is to serve as a
check of any passions a majority may have. Introducing majority
referendum into this structure would, at is worst, serve to undermine
elected officials whose charter is to make informed decisions on
behalf of the community, as well as ensure that minority views are
taken into account in decisions.


**Importance of Civic Virtues**

A final point is easy to overlook, but it must be emphasized. The
Baha'i Faith is a religious institution. The Baha'i governing bodies
cannot in any way be divoriced from the virtues that are inculcated by
membership in the Baha'i Faith.

It should be noted that the Baha'i Faith in no way labels any
particular virtue as being "civic." Like presumably most religions,
virtues stand on their own, and a practicing believer is presumed to
exhibit the same virtues in practicing his civic affairs as in his
personal and professional affairs. For example, it is a poor Christian
who practices honesty in his personal and professional affairs, yet
discards it in performing his civic duties.

However, this does not mean all virtues are equally important in
conduct as a good citizen.  To this end, author Brian Aull has
identified certain virtues that are seen as particularly important by
the Baha'i Faith for effective governance. These are applicable not
only for Baha'is, but as necessary requirements of good
citizenship. He refers to these virtues as a triad:
 * service
 * learning
 * community
 
Additionally, he identifies others that are particularly
important. Trustworthiness, described as "the foundation of all
virtues" in the Baha'i Faith, is seen as particularly important for
anyone in civic life, particularly elected representatives. And in
North America, the particular challenge of rascism is strong enough
that good citizens should be especially aware of this in their conduct
and in the positions they choose to espouse.

Indeed, many of the mechaisms of the Baha'i Administrative Order would
not work without this emphasis on civic virtues. Consultation would
not work without the necessary attitude of respect and humanity
towards those we disagree with, and would result in an unbroken series
of rancorous majority-only decisions. Block-voting and collusion would
undermine the plurality voting system and destroy any hope for
representative assemblies. The limited transparency necessary for an
open uncensored exchange of ideas would give way to secrecy. The fixed
and fluid nature of the executive would mean that every change of
power would result in thoughtless arbitrary changes in the executive
and other adjunct institutions. While this author hopes that all of
these principles can be brought to bear on contemporary civic
governance, this principle is perhaps the most important.


## Historical Parallels: Rule By Jury (Sortition)

I have tended to use the phrase "participative democracy" when
describing the Baha'i governing system. Let no one doubt - the Baha'i
Administrative Order **is** a democracy. However, it is unusual enough
that one may legitimately consider it as an entirely new structure.

There is one historical structure that this has some elements in
common with - the rule by "sortition," or rule by jury. The best known
example is that of certain Greek communities of antiquity, where
rulers were drawn from citizens by lots. This is a little-known area
of political science - the only thing I could find on the internet was
an obscure preprint on "Government by Jury". Yet it makes several
interesting point about how this might be a superior form of
government:

* By selecting a group of people from random, you get a good
  cross-section of the community. This makes it much closer to a full
  direct democracy, in that people selected are a subset of the
  community at large, rather than those simply of those preferred by
  majorities.

* The purpose of the group is to deliberate, rather than represent
  someone else's viewpoint. It is to fact-find and come up with the
  best decision.

* Juries generally discuss resolution of their issues in isolation,
  where they can be free of public pressures.

It is this author's assessment that the elected bodies of Baha'i
governance bear far more resemblence to government by sortion than
government by representative bodies. True, they are elected, but
there are a few things I've noticed before. Some are from
recollections of a small sample size (having served as teller a few
times), but I'd be surprised if they failed to hold up unde r study:

* The elected members of the assembly generally form a microcosm,
  demographically speaking, of the community that they represent. It
  is rare for one element to dominate (unless, of course, it dominates
  the community).

* In the larger communities, it is rare for any one Baha'i to actually
  collect a pure majority of votes.

* People already on assemblies garner their share of votes, but it is
  rare to see someone vote for all nine to stay put. It is likewise
  rare to see a ballot with votes for none of the existing assembly
  members.

* There doesn't seem to be much correlation with how people vote. I
  suspect correlations between people voted for are actually quite
  low, indicating Baha'is are taking very seriously Shoghi Effendi's
  warning against collusion in voting. It also means any presumption
  of a "conservative" versus "liberal" divides within the Baha'i
  community is probably nonsense. Were it the case, you would clearly
  see it in correlated voting patterns.

* I suspect the distribution of votes for members in the community
  follows a power law once the community reaches a certain size. I
  would need siginificantly more vote totals to bear this out.

There is frequent complaints of low turnover on assemblies, and I've
heard some people complain in muttered tones that it is due to
complacency or people voting for the same people. In fact, this is
just a natural outcome of the way the votes fall out; there is no
"incumbent slate" that is forcing the same people on the community
again and again. My suspicion is the votes for individuals remain
stable over time. If the vote distribution really does follow the
power law, and people really are voting on the basis of how one judges
the character of someone in the community, then there is little reason
to think that the vote count any single individual collects would
change dramatically
over time, since their character certainly isn't going to change
much. The more likely outcome is that you will have several people
year over year who do well in voting, with perhaps some movement in
the vote total order once you are past the top five vote getters,
resulting one or two new people getting on the assembly occasionaly.
And that is indeed what you do see.

The longing for a "throw the bums out" slate is a feature of
representative government, but is usually associated with partisan
politics. In the context of a "jury government," the intention is that
in the final analysis, it really doesn't matter which representaties
you pick, so long as they are loyal and competent enough to follow
their process carefully. As such, "throw the bums out" may not work,
if what you get is another distribution of "bums" drawn from the same
sample set, more likely than not looking exactly like the first set in
composition. This author's suspicion is that the Baha'i Elections are
working as intended; the reason for the dissatisfaction may very well
be because, not in spite of, the fact that the elected assemblies
reflect the community of voters within the Baha'i community; and that
were there massive turnover, the makeup of the new assemblies would
very much resemble the old one in the mix of opinions, attitudes and
demographics.

## Caveats for Learning

Before discussing what the Baha'i Faith has to offer in this area,
there are some important caveats that need to be acknowledged. This is
important to prevent recommending practices that may not work in
secular settings. While Baha'i Faith has much to offer on the issue of
participative governance, it is important to note this is not the
primary purpose of the Baha'i Faith. It addresses this issue
extensively, insofar as it serve the purpose of "creating an
ever-advancing civilization."  However, the Baha'i Faith itself cannot
be confused with a political system, or even a movement of social
reform, much as it can contribute to those areas.

It must be remembered that the Baha'i Institutions, as they currently
exist, are primary "spiritual" instatutions for the propagation and
protection of The Faith. They are limited in both the power
and sphere of operation. While this does not mean it is impractical to
look at Baha'i governance and decision-making as a model, it
does mean that certain values and ethical mores that are taken for
granted in Baha'i governance cannot be presumed to exist in
secular political solutions. This means any civic or secular
institution adopting these may wish to enforce safeguards that do not
exist in the Baha'i Faith.

An example may make this concrete. Baha'i elections must take place in
an atmosphere of reverent reflection and prayer, which is seen as
central to governance; electioneering is prohibited at voting. United
States elections have some of the same features; polling places are
unusually orderly, and I rarely hear anyone talking in the line for
polling. Having voted in Baha'i elections for over twenty years and US
elections for over thirty years, I can confidently say that both
elections take place in a quiet, respectful environment. However, the
nature of enforcement is quite different. Electioneering in Baha'i
voting is so unthinkable that controls are rarely thought of as
necessary. However, in civic elections in the United States, there are
usually purposely visible law enforcement officials prominently
stationed who will slap handcuffs on anyone who don't stay outside of
the orange pylons at the polling booth when handing out
pamphlets. Nothing keeps honest people honest like armed enforement.

This means we need to cast a more skeptical eye on practices that
could be easy to corrupt due to bad faith and agency concerns. At the
very least, we would need safeguards that are thought of as
unnecessary. For instance, the diversity necessary for proper
selection of Spiritual Assemblies requires plurality voting, which
requires that everyone take to heart Shoghi Effendi's warnings against
corruption, collusion, partisan politics and formation of blocs. One
reason plurality voting is probably rare in practice may be because it
is easily corrupted by the use of "block voting" by groups within
organizations. Whispering campaigns could be used to target elected
members, perhaps initiated by electees who wish to drive out members
with disagreeing views. Members could likewise selectively leak their
opposition to initiatives sponsored by their own bodies, to limit
their effectiveness. This does not mean that secular governance cannot
learn from the Baha'i Faith, but it does mean that additional
safeguards not practiced by Baha'is must be introduced. For voting,
this may mean automatic checks for "block voting" and retention of
ballots. For elected officials, this may require prohibitions on
speech similar to those used on juries when one is told not to discuss
the case outside the jury room.

A final point is that Baha'i governance is presumed to be weilded by
those who care about the Baha'i Faith. This is so obvious you may
wonder why I'm saying this. But it is worth remembering
that some people wish to serve in goverments for the purposely
proclained intention of ruining said government for one's own
reasons. Someone may gain control of institutions in order to force
them into inefficiency, providing them an excuse to set up new institutions
tailored to their own liking. Or, someone who wishes to weaken the
power of civic governance may find it easy to run things exremely
badly and inefficiently, essentially wrecking things for everyone,
rather than to have an honest debate about any presumed excesses of civic
governance. The lack of checks and balances in this system means that
if a corrupt slate of candidates did somehow gain control of the
organization, it could do an enormous amount of damage under their
control until new elections can be held.

# Lessons for Governance

As discussed, the Baha'i Faith embeds a number of ideas in its
governance. One may borrow one or some of these elements to improve
democratic institutions. Baha'is may point out
that this is intended as an organic whole; critics may point out that
this is fine for the organization for which it was developed; e.g. a
religious organization. But as Baha'is, we beliefe that not only is it
an ideal mechanism for us, but it serves as a model for the
world. Being that it is unrealistic that any civic organization would
pick up on this in its entirety, it should certainly be reasonable to
expect that it can be used to improve certain governance. As Baha'is,
we hope that not only can it be used as an improvement, but that it
can serve as a guiding principles for new forms of governance to take
us beyond the majoritarian representation democracies that are
accepted as givens throughout the world.

Restating the principles from the above analysis, they are as follows:

1. Importance of nonpartisan consultative deliberation, and consensus
decision-making as strongly-preferred ideal.

2. Representatives work on behalf of organization as a whole, rather
than constituents.

3. Voter selection of elected represtatives based on character,
deliberative abilities, and ability to listen.

4. Lack of a unitary executive or sole person as leader.

5. Ban on political parties and factions.

6. No campaigning and electioneering; ban on block
voting.

7. Proper control of election environment; emphasis on ease of
voting. Goal of 100% participation.

8. Representatives selected in a manner to represent diverity of
views (e.g. proportional representation, sortition, etc.).

9. Minimal consitituion focusing on rulemaking body. Legislature can
change executive, but is not free in any way to amend core principles.

10. Indirect elections of regional, national and international bodies.

11. Limited transparency of deliberations to ensure frank exchange of
views.

12. Importance of education of citizenry in civic virtues.

13. Emphasis on decentralization; federalism.

14. Heavy emphasis on input and feedback from members at large, but no
mechanism to bypass leadership via referendum process.

As indicated in the caveat above, it may not be possible to adopt any
single one in isolation, and many may require enforement mechanisms
that are unneeded and undesireable in the religious community from
which it springs. But with this caveat, there are still a wide range
of reommendations that can be used to improve civic governance, from
small organizations, to regional goverments up to nation-states
themselves. Outside of the context of the Baha'i Faith, it is
interesting to speculate which ones may be of use, and which ones
require use in tandem with others in order to prevent corruption.

## For Voluntary Organizations, Nonprofits, Corporations

TO BE FILLED IN

## For Civic Governance

TO BE FILLED IN

# Concluding notes

TO BE FILLED IN

# Endnotes and Appendices

(1) Much as alternatives to our current form of democracy are so
unappealing that it is resigned to as a given, the capitalistic
economy is also accepted as a given. The failed
alternative economies of the late twentieth century all posed very
similar alternatives - that of massive state control. Marxist
governments imposed this for theoretical reasons; other regimes, be
they fascist, military juntas or othertherwise, imposted state control
out of convenience, all the better to confiscate the goods necessary
to pay off supporters and members of favored classes. Since all forms
relied on excessive state control, all suffered the same general
problems. Whatever one may think the root cause of collaps of
these governments was, the fact that economic inefficiencies and an
inability to compete on the world states was a crucial contributor.

The textbook explanation is that state-controlled economies lacked the
pricing mechanisms that served to send signals throughout the economy
that kept demand and supply balanced. While that may be true, it is
possible that even more damage was caused by placing all control in
the economy in the hands of the state. By doing so, it made the
government itself, rather than individual enterprises, the prime
target for the sociopathically greedy and the grifter. As a result,
these economies were not only inefficient, but frequently run through
with corruption to the highest levels. In any event, current
alternatives to capatalist economies are generally framed in terms of
_different_ capitalist models. One may think of the United States,
China and the Nordic countries as all having different economic
systems, but remarkably all of them are identifiably
capitalistic. Indeed, alternatives proposed by critics of capitalism
usually consist of heavily redistributive tax levies to transfer
wealth from the wealthy to the poor - all the while, keeping the
entire basic capitalist structure otherwise intact.

The primary problem is a lack of a practical, appealing alternative
that can work on an international scale. There are in fact,
glimmerings of alternatives for those who wish to look: social
enterpreneurs working off of grants and funding aggregators; economic
theorists testing alternate currencies; the open source software
community, where product is given away and services based on that
product are sold. Indeed, much of the wealth created today is in the
form of intellectual property, which once created, can be used by any
number of people. This fact in and of itself is enough to break
standard economic models, which are based on goods that, once produced
can only be used by a single purchaser. But as of yet, there is no
sign of an alternative to market economies as efficient models for
distribution of goods and services.

(2) This work has been undertaken primarily with an eye towards
analyzing features that make it differ from current democratic
structures through society, and how others can benefit by adopting
these features. But a secondary reason for this work is to ensure that
the Administrative Order is characterized properly, to that
questioning souls can properly understand it. While there are some who
may attack the Baha'i Faith governance due to bad faith, there are no
doubt many more who have legitimate questions about its structure, and
such people deserve thoughtful answers.

It is important to note from the outset that the features delimited
are looked upon with skepticism by many.  From the point of view of
someone only familiar with current civic models of government, one
that presumes representatives must represent consituents and takes
such things as political parties and coalition politics as a given,
the Baha'i Faith looks like a flawed democracy. Indeed, there have
been governments that have negatively reacted to its structure, egged
on by the accusations of those who wish The Baha'i Faith ill. There
are also those defenders of liberalism who would otherwise be
well-wishers but react negatively to unfamiliar constructs which are
seen as undemocratic. Finally there are those who are negatively
disposed toward organized religion itself and will take any
opportunity to use points of novelty to paint our administrative
organization as regressive.

There have also been well-known controversies in the past thirty
years as some academics, no doubt steeped in the knowledge of
democracies and liberal norms, initiated a campaign to "fix" the
elected institutions to adhere to such forms. Indeed, well before
these controversies, the Universal House of Justice indicated the
difficulty some tendencies of thought were causing in the communities
of the west:

    We have noticed with concern evidences of a confusion of attitudes
    among some of the friends when they encounter difficulties in
    applying Bahá'í principles to questions of the day. On the one
    hand, they acknowledge their belief in Bahá'u'lláh and His
    teachings; on the other, they invoke Western liberal democratic
    practices when actions of Bahá'í institutions or of some of their
    fellow Bahá'ís do not accord with their expectations.

	(The Universal House of Justice, A Wider Horizon, Selected
	Letters 1983-1992, p. 218)

If one wishes to use Baha'i governance as a model and
apply its principles to secular governances, one must surely
understand the model first, rather than misclassifying it. Any
recommendation to "reform" it cannot be done without acknowledging its
strengths and mechanisms. Once properly understood, such reasons for
reform may disappear; contrariwise, if after understood, reasons for
reform remain, then surely a strong case for such reform can be made
and justified in consultation with the community.

One thing that stands out in much questioning is the fact that many
skeptics seem to have an ideal government already in mind: the
Popperian ideal, in which two opposed parties vie for control and
battle for favor of voters. Under such a mindset, the only problem
with contemporary governments is the need for modifications at the
margins, such as controls on election spending and a more engaged and
educated population. Unfortunately, the premature acceptance of this
model overlooks the deep problems with representative democracies that
have become apparent over time. Questioners and would-be "reformers"
frequently overlook the possiblity that there may be forms of
participative governments that may be more just and fair while being
less "democratic" in the terms we know. In this author's opinion, what
is needed is less "democracy" in the majoritarian sense, and more
focus on justice and maintaining the rights and responsibilities all
citizens share.

(3) One of the most obvious points this analysis purposely elides is
the Baha'i Faith's attitude toward the relationship between church and
state. This is a issue that bears further serious analysis by scholars
within the Baha'i Faith, but is out of the scope of this paper.

This author has found that within the Baha'i Faith, there are a wide
variety of beliefs of how this relationship may develop over
time. Some believe that the Baha'i Administrative order is destined
over time to become the overarching world government that the Baha'i
writings point to. Others are more skeptical, pointing to other
tablets and writings of 'Abdu'l-Baha seem to confirm that church and state
must maintain separate domains. Finally others maintain that any such
notions are so far removed from the future as to have no realistic
bearing on how Baha'is behave in their day to day lives, even in how
they present the Baha'i Faith to outsiders.

This author is of the latter view. It is easy to find many devoted
Baha'is who presume that future developments will inevitably lead to a
rebirth of the "corporate state," similar to the Catholic Church in
the time prior to Vatican I reform - a unitary merge of State and
Religion in which the Baha'i Faith's own institution of governance, as
it _currently exists_, is the central point of centralized control for
this government. There are even those who insist that this is the one
correct view. This author's honest opinion is that forcing one's view
onto such controversies is a bit like insisting one's solution to the
eventual overpopulation of Martian colonies. Much as one figures
that it will eventually require a solution, it is so far removed that
one cannot but think this is a proxy fight over something else.  The
Baha'i Faith has much to say about government, but it is a misreading
to think that _current_ institutions are anything more than an
embryonic foreshadowing of what may happen in the future. It is
tempting, but probably inappropriate at this present moment, to
envision how the involvement of Baha'i institutions will impact
secular institutions in the future.

It is, however, important to be able to address misconceptions brought
by questioners. The Baha'i Faith anticipates the formation of a world
government; it anticipates the formation over time of an entire world
commonwealth. These points are quite explicit in Shoghi Effendi's
_World Order of Baha'u'llah_:

    ... as the Baha'i Faith permeates the masses of the peoples of
    East and West, and its truth is embraced by the majority of the
    peoples of a number of the Sovereign States of the world, will the
    Universal House of Justice attain the plenitude of its power, and
    exercise, as the supreme organ of the Baha'i Commonwealth, all the
    rights, the duties, and responsibilities incumbent upon the
    world's future super-state.

Critics have used writings such as these levy against the Faith the
charge that what Baha'is seek is a new Caliphate. Baha'is have tended to
react by pointing out the noncoercive nature of Baha'i membership and
the democratic mechanism of elections, and the fact that world
government and commonwealth may mean entirely different things. What
both critics and defenders fail to realize that the institutions of
the Faith themselves are intended to evolve over time. Shoghi Effendi
gives two defenses of this accusation of trying to create a new
caliphate. His first defense, which will only resonate with believers,
is that the religious governmental structure is explicitly outlined by
our Prophet and Founder Baha'u'llah. For nonbelievers, the other
defense he gives is more meaningful:

    ... whatever is deemed necessary to incorporate into it in order
    to keep it in the forefront of all progressive movements, can,
    according to the provisions made by Baha'u'llah, be safely
    embodied therein. To this testify the words of Baha'u'llah, as
    recorded in the Eighth Leaf of the exalted Paradise: "It is
    incumbent upon the Trustees of the House of Justice to take
    counsel together regarding those things which have not outwardly
    been revealed in the Book, and to enforce that which is agreeable
    to them. God will verily inspire them with whatsoever He willeth,
    and He, verily, is the Provider, the Omniscient." Not only has the
    House of Justice been invested by Baha'u'llah with the authority
    to legislate whatsoever has not been explicitly and outwardly
    recorded in His holy Writ, upon it has also been conferred by the
    Will and Testament of Abdu'l-Baha the right and power to abrogate,
    according to the changes and requirements of the time, whatever
    has been already enacted and enforced by a preceding House of
    Justice. (21-Mar-1930)

That is, because only the framework for governance is laid down, it is
possible to make whatever changes to administrative structure that is
required going forward.  This implies a level of dynamism in its
structure that many believers may not be aware of. Most Americans are
used to the near-impossibility of amending the constitution and
believe it to be a necessary part of democracy, unaware that many
political scientists consider that to be its most serious flaw. Again,
Shoghi Effendi:

    Not only will the present-day Spiritual Assemblies be styled
    differently in future, but they will be enabled also to add
    to their present functions those powers, duties, and prerogatives
    necessitated by the recognition of the Faith of Baha'u'llah, not
    merely as one of the recognized religious systems of the world,
    but as the State Religion of an independent and Sovereign Power.
    (27-Feb-1929)

And similarly with regard to the institutions of that time:

    ... the whole machinery of assemblies, of committees and
    conventions is to be regarded as a means, and not an end in
    itself; that they will rise or fall according to their capacity to
    further the interests, to coordinate the activities, to apply the
    principles, to embody the ideals and execute the purpose of the
    Baha'i Faith.

While this was written in 1929, Baha'is will readly admit that this
quote covers the present-day orders of the Baha'i Faith with equal accuracy.

(4) Baha'is reading will probably note one obvious omitted trait of the
Administrative order that would seem to undercut this point. One
unusual feature of the Baha'i Faith is that the lack of a unitary
executive may be due to something of a historical accident.
'Abdu'l-Baha, in his will and testament, created the "Guardianship,"
rather than call for the election of the Universal House of
Justice. This Guardian was seen as having a complimentary role to the
Universal House of Justice. In practice, the only Guardian who ever
took the position at a time when the Universal House of Justice had
been formed and died before its election could be held. This position
ended in 1957 when the sole Guardian, Shoghi Effendi, died without a
replacement. In the sixty-one years that have followed, no single
individual has never directed the affairs of the Baha'i Faith.

For this reason, I have included this as a salient feature of the
Baha'i Faith. One can only speculate whether the founders of the
Baha'i Faith knew that somehow this line would end even before the
election of the Universal House of Justice.
