---
title: The Three Voids of Philosophy
---

I should confess some trepidation writing this post. I'm a philosophy
amateur. That's *amateur*, not *auteur*. I haven't had an academic
training in the discipline, and given how many philosophy outsiders
manage to produce really really well-written but bad philosophy,
I don't consider this a good thing, particular since I can't even
count on well-written. I've read just enough to be dangerous, and
hopefully, make sure I don't make bad logical errors.

That being said, I've read a fair bit, much of it fairly recent, and
it does broaden my thought to some extent. Not as much as it should,
honestly, particularly if you read current philosophy!

People think of philosophy as about "the big ideas" - think of Hegel's
grand cycles of history, or the idealists of the nineteenth century
posing a "universal mind" in which the physical world is just a matrix
inside of it; or going much further back, the "Platonic World," where
all of the universal concepts exist in a world of perfection outside
of this one. Given this background, twentieth century philosophy seems
unusually small bore. Instead of big ideas, the past hundred years
have instead seen a capitulation to a certain constrained reductivist,
materialist outlook. The reasons are legion - the triumph of
materialist positivism in late nineteenth century thought; the rise of
the analytic school of philosophy in the early twentieth century that
regarded unverifiable metaphysical ideas as being nothing more than
"word games"; an onward march of scientific progress that resulted in
many of the core issues unders discussion being abandoned by the field
of philosophy as pursuits of an essentially scientific nature. By
midcentury, the field was dominated by set theorists, analytic
philosophers and linguists, determined that everything be seen, proven
and rigorously defined. If you didn't buy that, the only alternative
taken seriously were the continental mirror-cousins, the
deconstructionists, who were only certain that nothing was
knowable. And if the field of philosophy itself was not so uniform and
monochromatic as I pose, the major figures one might read about in the
popular press certainly were.

Likewise, suppose one takes take a Philosophy 101 course at your
nearby State U. In it, you will encounter terminology describing some
of the major fields covered by philosophy:

* The Mind/Body Problem
* Metaphysics
* Teleology
* Ethics
* Values, e.g. "The Good, The Beautiful," Aesthetics, etc.

These are all fields of study going back to the great Greek
philosophers. For some, this *is* philosophy. But on the other hand,
if you walk up to your philosophy professors and say you are going to
do your thesis in one of these fields, your instructor will probably
confess no interest, but may probably refer you to a colleague of
his, with the cryptic recommendation "I hope he works for you; other
than him, nobody does that sort of stuff nowadays." And if you read
recently-written philosophy books aimed at the general public, you
will find out why quickly - these areas are no longer considered the
stuff of serious philosophy.

How did these once-great areas of study
become obsolete?

The reason is because the dominant strain in philosophy for the past
century and a half has been materialist; specifically, a reductive
materialist philosophy that has very little use for discussions of
these concepts. The Mind/Body problem is regarded as solved; your mind
is a phantom of your brain, and your thoughts can be traced by by
electrical signals in your brain; your consciousness is just a trick
created by your brain, as is your sense of free will. The mechanics,
still unknown, are left to the reader, as it is assumed that science
will solve it for us. Metaphysics is essentially regarded as useless,
untestable magical claims. Teleology, the study of the purpose of
things, is no better, as nothing can be claimed to have any purpose,
as things simply _are_.  Finally, ethics, aesthetics and other
value-driven judgements are regarded as essentially human concerns,
value-neutral concepts either defined arbitrarily by culture or
validated only by evolutionary fitness. Either way, all of these
fields are perhaps the stuff of relativism and cultural studies;
interesting, but not Philosophy.

In 2012 Thomas Nagel, nearing the end of his career, penned a short
book titled _Mind & Cosmos_ that seemed to break with this
outlook. The book came with what is probably a purposely provocative
subtitle: "Why the Materialist Neo-Darwinian Conception of Nature Is
Almost Certainly False." The subtitle, possibly thrust upon him by the
publisher, certainly didn't help his cause, as he doesn't offer the
strong proof his subtitle would require. But in spite of the title,
Nagel's thrust was clear: he feels philosophy has unnecessarily
constrained itself by presuming a strongly materialist, darwinian
viewpoint of nature, when the proof of this viewpoint is not nearly as
strong as presumed. Critically, if one thinks that concepts like
teleology, values or ethics and sentient consciousness are actually
things in and of themselves, rather than illusory daemons created by a
wetware desparate to look for patterns, then the book argues that you
_must_ go outside of materialist philosophy - because materialist
philosophy denies all of these things as having meaning.

The main thesis of his book is that science has claimed too
much territory for itself; the mind-body problem, far from being a
purely mechanical question of neurons, is a pervasive problem far from
being solved; and that the present sciences are too limited to yet
yield the definitive answers it claims to questions of philosophy:

    It may be frustrating to acknowledge, but we are simply at the
    point in the history of human thought at which we find ourselves,
    and our successors will make discoveries and develop forms of
    understanding of which we have not dreamt. Humans are addicted to
    the hope for a final reckoning, but intellectual humility requires
    that we resist the temptation to assume that tools of the kind we
    now have are in principle sufficient to understand the universe as
    a whole. Pointing out their limits is a philosophical task,
    whoever engages in it, rather than part of the internal pursuit of
    science—though we can hope that if the limits are recognized, that
    may eventually lead to the discovery of new forms of scientific
    understanding.

    Nagel, Thomas. _Mind and Cosmos: Why the Materialist Neo-Darwinian
    Conception of Nature Is Almost Certainly False_ (p. 3). Oxford
    University Press. Kindle Edition.

Nagel's book spends much of this time probing areas in which science,
and therefore materialistic philosphy has fallen short, and posits
that there are unseen aspects of reality that are involved. The
problem is not the fact that philosophers have these materialist
theories, but the fact that so many philosophers, scientists and
serious thinkers will will not countenance any alternatives:

   My target is a comprehensive, speculative world picture that is
   reached by extrapolation from some of the discoveries of biology,
   chemistry, and physics... among the scientists and philosophers who
   do express views about the natural order as a whole, reductive
   materialism is widely assumed assumed to be the only serious
   possibility. (p. 4)

In the book's conclusion, he calls for humility by the current
scientific and philosophical establishment, given the reach of what we
do not know:

    ... I would like to extend the boundaries of what is not
    regarded as unthinkable, in light of how little we really
    understand about the world. It would be an advance if the secular
    theoretical establishment, and the contemporary enlightened
    culture which it dominates, could wean itself of the materialism
    and Darwinism of the gaps — to adapt one of its own pejorative
    tags. (p. 127)

Upon release of the book a few years ago, it was received with
mediocre reviews, in spite of Nagel's considerable reputation. The
point most found objectionable his argument against evolution
itself as a complete explanation of the current world. Nagel claims we
still don't know enough about the mechanics of how life actually
started or evolved from simple prototypical life into complex forms,
or why evolution would have produced sentience and consciousness, and
there is no reason to believe that science will be able to answer
these questions with the tools they have today. Strongly materialist
philosophers and the "New Atheists" rejected this argument _en toto_;
having read some of the reviews, one gets the idea that they did not
so much read the book as skim the first third of the book for
quotations that they could take offense to. They seemed particularly
incensed that Nagel had some sympathy for the Intelligent Design
community, in spite of his having serious disagreements with them. (For
many philosophers, this is consorting with the enemy, the
pseudointellectual brownshirts of dread Religion.) But even more
fair-minded observers indicated that his proofs were quite weak; in
particular, his assertion that we don't know the mechanics of how life
evolved from non-life seems to ignore the last twenty-odd years of
research in the field.

I very much liked this book, though not his arguments against evolution,
which I also found unpersuasive. This was particularly problematic
given some of his later claims reseted on this assertion. However, I
appreciated something he attempted that I felt was far more
consequential: an attempt to restore meaningful discussions around
concepts that still deserve addressing, concepts that in spite of
their intrinsic importance have been swept aside as untestable,
unverifiable, ill-posed or meaningless.

-------------------------------

What are some of these important concepts? I alluded to them earlier.
Supposing you are a reflective person. Being such a person, you might
think reflective thoughts. "What is my purpose in life?" "What am I
doing here?" "How do I know what is good, is good?" "What does it mean
to be a good persion?" "Do my ethical choices matter?" You may even
ask this of your friends. Depending on your friends, they may tell you
to just put down the bong and stop asking dumb questions. But historically,
this has been the stuff of philosophy.

Unfortunately, the response from the most popular philosophy writers
and/or scientists posing as philisophy writers will also be "You heard
him, put down the bong." They will generally regard all of these
questions as inheritly meaningless. "Well, it depends upon what you
think _good_ means," or "'Am I a good person?'  is a meaningless
question, that isn't something you can test," or "The notion of
'purpose' is meaningless, you just are." When such people are asking
these questions, they are not being Socratic and forcing you to
better define and clarify your thought. No, the reason is because they
don't even approve of the line of inquiry. Legitimate questions stick
to certain subjects, particularly those amenable to scientific
inquiry; anything else is fundamantally unverifiable and therefore
illegitimate. Not all philosophers believe this, of course, but this
mindset seems to be exactly what Nagel is targeting here.

It should be said at the outset that not all philosophers believe
this; Nagel is hardly a voice calling from out of the wilderness. The
impression that all philosophers speak in one voice is probably a
consequence of market segmentation in nonfiction books. The number of
people who read philosophy casually is vanishingly small; the number
of professional practitioners, much smaller still. If you want to
publish philosophy that is actually read (as opposed to merely being
cited by some other philosophy publication), you have to print what
someone wants to read. And what people apparently want to read is
justification for the sort of skeptical materialist outlook that is
defended by these popular publications, written either for people who
loath religious people, or those who loath humanity and find Ayn Rand
insufficient to the task. While there are dissenting respectable
voices, they do not sell as well as the sloppy
religious refutations of this world view aimed at "people of Faith."
Unfortunately for this book, being one of the rare examples of a trade
press book fitting into neither camp, it has been stuck
in to the latter camp in spite of Nagel's reputation and professed
atheism, and its reception has unfairly suffered accordingly.

While the reception given Nagel's message is unfortunate dismissal, my
hope is that it will still prove one more voice of encouragement
toward moving philosophers away from their present circumscribed
fields of inquiry. In particular, there are three "voids" caused by
the avoidance of examination in twentieth-century thought, and all are
in need of revisiting. These also happen to three of the main themes
in Nagel's book:

* Free will and consciousness
* Purpose
* Values and Ethics

Of the first two fields, many materialists claim these cannot bear
study, as they are concepts that simply don't exist in any
meaningful way; free will, consciousness, and purpose are undefinable
illusions that we think were are important due to a defect in our brains.
This leaves the last thing, values and ethics, which have received a
serious amount of study, but mainly in attempts to wrench their
definition from a materialist world view that yields little in the way
of evidence to assist such an endeavor. The result has been to handle
questions of values and ethics as if they were studies of preference.

In my mind, the handling of ethics and political philosophy is
particularly tricky in the case of materialist philosophers. I find
Nagel's assertion that pure materialism is incompatible with moral
realism (the belief that there is such a thing as "right and wrong"
independent of cultural norms) particularly compelling. But absent
some sort of moral realism, it seems difficult to justify political philosophy
except as a means of analyzing existing systems without choosing
sides. While I respect writers such as Popper, Rawls and a lot of the
pragmatists who have tried to justify ethics and liberal governance
under generally materialist frameworks, not all philosophers are
either so thoughtful or concerned about seriously defending this
tradition as if it needs defending.

Instead, many writers, particularly the scientists posing as
philosophers, rely on a flawed ethics known as "naturalism."
Naturalism is a sort of common-sense ethics that says, in effect,
"humans are supposed to be good because it is in our nature to be good
and cooperative." Among those who study ethics, naturalism is thought
of as a fallacy; one cannot rely on "human nature" as a
foundation. The flaw in naturalism is obvious - just because someone
says that it's "human nature" (whatever that means) to act a certain
way doesn't mean _I_ should act in that way. It's human nature to get
angry at rivals and hurt them; does that make it OK to do so?  While I
haven't read anything by serious philosophers making this argument -
it is a fallacy, after all - its flaws hasn't stopped writers from
using this it.

In particular, many of the "new atheist" writers labor under the naive
presumption that enlightened ethics and liberal democratic governance
are commonsense corrolaries of materialist philosophy, and that they
simply flow from the way "we're supposed to be." Based on this, they
make their grand claim that purging mankind of the religious impulse
will result in an upswing of morality and respect for democratic norms
everywhere. We don't have to look quickly for counterexamples to
easily disprove it. Aside from the obvious examples of Stalinist USSR
or Maoist China to see that the forceful imposition of atheistic
philosophies doesn't result in this as a natural consequence, we can
also look at current events, where recent democratic failures have
trended with _increasing_ secularism throughout Europe and America (1).
I have to credit atheistic writer John Gray for this insight.

Once one throws out the fallacious naturalistic arguments of the
evangelists of atheism, leaving the serious thinkers, one is left with
this unpromising impression that materialist philosophy hasn't
produced much of a consensus on what good ethical behavior is. This is
probably because such philosophers have no common point of agreement
to work forward from. Where materialist philosophers have managed to
develop coherent ethical frameworks, they have done so by positing
universal ideals that are decidedly nonmaterial, and presumed that
mankind should aspire to these ideals, just... because? For instance,
the ideal of Justice, as written by Rawls and others, may be practiced
by material beings operating in a material univers, but Justice itself
is an interloper from a different platonic universe, and fits into our
three-dimentional material world no more naturally than a
tesseract. Much as wel love ideas of fairness and justice, they cannot be
derived from materialistic evolutionary or naturalistic traits.

What does Nagel say about this? While his book may have been
animated by his distrust of the promise of future scientific
breakthroughs to explain the origin of life and the phenomenon of
consciousness (something referred to elsewhere as "promissary
materialism"), he seems just as motivated by materialism's
incompatibility with _ethical realism_. Ethical realism is the notion
that there are such things that are _right_ and _wrong_, independent of
cultural or relative concerns. He explains his position thusly:

    My insistence that realism about value is not a metaphysical
    postulation of extra entities or properties might suggest that
    realism has no implications for the natural order. However, that
    is not the case. In essence, I agree with Sharon Street’s position
    that moral realism is incompatible with a Darwinian account of the
    evolutionary influence on our faculties of moral and evaluative
    judgment. Street holds that a Darwinian account is strongly
    supported by contemporary science, so she concludes that moral
    realism is false. I follow the same inference in the opposite
    direction: since moral realism is true, a Darwinian account of the
    motives underlying moral judgment must be false, in spite of the
    scientific consensus in its favor.  (p. 105)

Street's position, as reference by Nagel, is that humankind has been
shaped by evolution, and our morals are social characteristics that
have been selected for evolutionary fitness. Evolutionary fitness does
not imply anything representing concepts of _right_ or _wrong_. This
does not mean that one cannot believe in both evolution and moral
realism at the same time; what it does mean, is you cannot extract
moral realism from our evolved material nature. Evolution selects for
reproductive fitness only, and we can all think of immoral acts one
may commit that will increase our reproductive choices. Indeed, there
are entire industries dedicated to that.

Sometimes Nagel can seem to take this line of thinking a bit far. Not
only is there no reason whatsoever to presume that evolution has
selected for moral reason, he also claims that there is no reason to
think that evolution would have selected for our ability to know and
recognize truth; this again, follows along the lines of Street's
argument. Here, he may be somewhat weaker in that there is, after all,
a doubt that really understand what is truth. If one is a pure
pragmatist, who doesn't believe popular notions like
truth-as-correspondene or truth-as-verification then perhaps evolution
can explain our definition of truth somewhat. Likewise, one can be
believe in evolution while knowing that evolution has actually
selected for situations in which we believe absolute total falsehoods,
even though we can later learn to discern truth. There is a whole
subfield of behavior sciences dedicated to studying areas in which our
brains do not select for truth. The popular text on this, Kahneman's
_Thinking Fast and Slow_, provides plenty of examples of this. So any
honest evolutionary thinker will point out that our brains are not
wired to detect truth, and we need a fair bit of education to fix
that.

But this, I believe, points back to the main point Nagel wants to
make. We can all think of immoral actions we can take to increase our
reproductive choices. We can all think of times we've been changed our
minds and felt something that was once false is now true. The point
Nagel is making is that we seem to have these innate facilities that
recognize these points and correct things, in spite of our inherit
capability of wishful thinking and motivated reasoning. There is no
good way to explain these facilities through evolution. Our ability to
recognize certain abstract truths, what Nagel refers to as
"mind-independent" truths, would not give an evolutionary advantage to
us. It would be odd indeed if such a facility was simply coincidental
happenstance to exist in the one specimin of hominids that exist
today. Barring such an unusual concidence, the existence of this
facility must be due to some other sort of agent, one not explained by
evolutionary mechanics.

This line of thinking is a point Nagel harkens to repeatedly. Think of
the famous mind-body problem and consciousness. True, we can trace
back certain mental impulses back to electrical signals in the
brain, but this does not explain the fact that we actually feel
something. Those who associate our feeling of consciousness and self
with electrical signals have confused the territory with the
map. There is no explanation of how our feeling of "self" arises from
electrical signals in the brain; while the two are certainly
correlated, there is no explanation how one arises from the
other. Regarding materialist strategies of explaining consciousness,
such as "psycho-phisicla identity theory", he states:

    These strategies have taken increasingly sophisticated form, under
    the headings of causal behaviorism, functionalism, and other
    theories of how mental concepts could refer to states of the brain
    in virtue of the causal role of those states in controlling the
    interaction between the organism and its environment. But all such
    strategies are unsatisfactory for the same old reason: even with
    the brain added to the picture, they clearly leave out something
    essential, without which there would be no mind. And what they
    leave out is just what was deliberately left out of the physical
    world by Descartes and Galileo in order to form the modern concept
    of the physical, namely, subjective appearances. (p. 40)

In general, the explanation of humans as physical "meat machines" is
certainly possible, but there is no explanation of the _qualia_ that
gives rise to sentience. We could just as well be robotic automatons
and yet be carrying out the same actions, the so-called "philosophical
zombie" that philosophical like David Chalmers has posed. Indeed,
others philosophers have pointed this out.

Nagel, in fact, believes consciousness itself to be one of the most
significant features of our world - so much so that it cannot be posed
as being due to pure happenstance, as materialists are wont to do:

    So long as the mental is irreducible to the physical, the
    appearance of conscious physical organisms is left unexplained by
    a naturalistic account of the familiar type. On a purely
    materialist understanding of biology, consciousness would have to
    be regarded as a tremendous and inexplicable extra brute fact
    about the world. If it is to be explained in any sense
    naturalistically, through the understanding of organic life,
    something fundamental must be changed in our conception of the
    natural order that gave rise to life. (pp. 45-46)

To this, materialist philosophers have what they find is a convincing
argument - consciousness is, in fact, a complete accident in our
material world. We were lucky to have evolved sentience, and luckier
still to have the intelligence enough to argue about such matters. But
because of this, we can have these discussions. The fact that we are
having these discussion is proof only that we got lucky. This seems to
be the philosophical version of the "parallel worlds" theory of why
certain cosmological constants are balanced such that life exists -
essentially, that they aren't balanced, it's just that there are
billions of parallel universes and we would only turn up in the ones
that allow for life.

Getting back to the main point, I feel that materilistic philosophy is
giving up "too much," by presuming that our understanding of the
universe will never change in a significant way and that all we have
yet to do is fill in the gaps in ever-more-inscrutable quantum
mechanics, they also make the presumption that we can have definite
knowledge of the answer to these big questions. Once philosophy
accepts this self-imposed limitation, it becomes a less powerful
tool. Rather than expore those questions, they instead offer a simple
answer: there is no answer. There is no answer to our purpose in life;
there is no free will to ponder over; there is no universal ethics to
aspire to. We simply have to muddle through as best we can with the
tools at hand.

Such a conclusion is, on its own, rather useless in assisting both our
lives and our communities. The rather powerful report to this last
objection is, "So what?" While this non-answer answer would seem like
giving up to me, others would welcome it. A pure materialist would at
least have consistency on his or her side. The answer "there is no
answer" is, at the very least, one requiring a very simple world, one
free of as-yet-unknown mechanics behind our consciousness or platonic
universes from which independent ethical principles are derived. Such
a person has achieved true freedom in both the intellecual and ethical
sense, and is free to make his way in the universe as he sees
fit. What one does with this freedom is one's personal philosophy, and
a host of philosophies were developed in the twentieth century to
cater to this freedom.

---------------------------

The problem is that are questions that still need answering, where the
answer "There is no answer" will not do. In particular, there are
real, difficult problems of collective governance and purpose facing
humanity, and there is no guarantee that a materialistic, libertarian
philosophical path is suited toward solving these problems. Presently,
reductive materialism is seen by the intelligentia as the only
serious, rigorous framework for the analysis of problems. It is one
thing to adopt such a framework as a working hypothesis; it is yet
another thing if one insists it is the _only_ workable hypothesis, and
in so doing, leads to the premature drawing of conclusions producing
harmful effects.

In matters of personal morality, acceptance of purely physical
explanations is a significant step back. The only defensible creed arising
from materialisism is essentially Do What Thou Wilt. This sounds like
a rather dark creed, but at least it is easy to defend. If one is not
a fink and just happens to just have a noble disposition, one can lead
an exemplary life. If you're horrible, you get to be horrible, but
fortunately most people are not horrible. The "new atheists"
frequently posit that atheists as a whole are more ethical than people
of faith, and they are eager to cite studies showing a statistically
significant (if small) differences showing that. However, the "new
athesists" then pose that concepts like guarantees of personal
liberty, equality before the law, and the host of rights accorded with
left-of-center societies are presumed to arise naturally out of the
matrix of materialism. I'm happy to hear this, as these are ideals I
love, but none of these ideas arise from science. While these writers
are insistent that the primary roadblock to the triumph of these ideas
is the belief in metaphysics and postulation of greater entities,
unethical presumptions that distort human nature and explain Why We
Can't Have Nice Things like competent functioning democracies, this is
wishful thinking. The framework of universal rights and liberal
governance did not spring from a materialistic basis. However much one
may dislike Neitchze, one cannot simply discard his arguments simply
because they lead to inconvenient conclusions.

Not all atheistic philosophers are this inconsistent. One can believe
in a moral realism or ethical universals and still hold that the
essence of the universe is essentially mechanical _as a working
theory_. But what one cannot do is hold lofty assertions of moral
realisms and universal rights, and then at the same time hold a theory
of nature that gives these assertions no foundation, all the while
attacking those who presume any different foundation rests on
superstition. Why?  Because under strict materialism, appeals to
brotherly love or universal rights or even simply the survival of the
human race and the planet so that "we can keep the conversation going"
are not obvious conclusions of a materialistic worldview. They are
much more easily explained as the dictates of social pressure and
sentimentality. A materialist cannot invoke extrauniversals like
"natural law" and "justice" as if they are platonic ideals, and at the
same time regard them only as private epiphenomenon of certain
sufficiently-complex biological neural networks; compelling to the
thinker, but hardly compelling enough to result in enforcement of
behavioral norms on others. Instead, the best one can say is that
humans are free to work together and build their Leviathan or whatever
government they want, but they had best be resigned to the knowledge
that this is a result of their own selfish impulses; nothing grander
actually exists.

Moving on from the subject of individual ethics, there is an even more
problem compelling problem of collective ethics. Shared ethics
requires a framework agreed to widely by society as a whole. Mankind
is currently faced with multiple crises if, badly handled, could
easily lead to the collective suicide of the human race. In the case
one holds a purely materialist viewpoint, there is a real question as
to whether or not this mass suicide is really a big deal; if the
death of humanity and the snuffing out of what may be an extremely
rare case of evolved sentient creatures is fated, then it is of no
difference to The Universe. We are just one more species on one
insignificant planet fated to fall victim to the Great Filter of Fermi
and doomed to extinction.

If, however, these assumptions are mistaken, then there is a real
possiblity that failing to grapple with these issues is an abdication
of the search for truth.

Philosophy and science give us a number of tools in the search for
truth. If science yields no answers in certain areas of the search for
truth, or is yet too immature, I feel no compunction about
disregarding any dictates that I should stop looking for answers
elsewhere. The search can take place any number of ways.

Nagel himself is not a theist, and his own hypothesis is to pose some
sort of _neutral monism_. Monism is a belief that all that exists is a
single substance; while not a dualist belief, an neutral monist will
hold that there is a physical part of reality, and a part that is
immaterial that is also part of that reality, and that is the part
explaining consciousness and the like.  This is one proposition; and a
believer in neutral monism can well believe in the reality of
immaterial concepts like ethical realism and justice.

A completely different solution is that offered by classical
pragmatism. By "classical," I'm referring to the earlier
followers of James, Pearce and their ilk who may encourage the search
for truth in spite of the fact that nothing may truly be knowable. I'm
in agreement with Nagel when he states that "The best we can do is to
develop the rival alternative conceptions in each important domain as
fully and carefully as possible, depending on our antecedent
sympathies, and see how they measure up. That is a more credible form
of progress than decisive proof or refutation." (p.127). I do not
regard it as a coincidence that Dewey, a pragmatist, has also been the
philosopher to give the most forceful voice defending the principles
of liberal democracies as imperative.

There are other forms of truth in the human experience, though not in
the form of rigorous proofs; some philosophers have urged us to see
this in the essentially "human" acitivities such as the arts, the
literature and our collective cultures. I haven't read much on this
line of thought, but I would like to suggest revisiting a different
line of thought that, however discredited, may assist in our search
for the answers.

When one looks through the history of culture, one is faced with the
reality of religion and the spiritual impulse as an ever-present
reality. While some cultures here and there have given this more or
less importance, it has been an ever present reality. This is an
important, overlooked source of truth - provided one knows where to
looks! Western philosophers have spent well neigh 400 years debunking
the features of the fixed creeds they are familiar with - in
particular, Christianity. I do not wish to belabor this point, other
than indicating that I also do not recommend looking for guidance in the
fixed creeds embodied by religious organizations.

It has been noted that there are probably structures in our brain
itself that support the religious impulse. Predictably, the reductive
materialists have treated this as an accident of evolution, this time
an unhappy one that must be treated like any other cognitive bais or
disorder. This reaction is predictable, given that they have no
trouble doing exactly the same thing with consciousness or recognition
of independent truths. The many defenders of theism likewise made
equally erroneous conclusions in favor of the opposite, as of that
this was a watertight defense of their case. But that being said, we
have thousands of years of philosophy and thought, much of it
dedicated toward elaborating principles of right and wrong and
justice and much of this is based in the religious impulse. The fact that
such concepts as justice, goodness and human purpose continue to
recur, and be addressed by both the religious impulse and philosophy
should be seen as significant. Those who claim that such concepts are
illusory because science and a reductive materialist world view has no
insights to yield should recognize the possibility that the problem
could be a lack of tools sufficient to the task on their part, not
that there is no answer. If the three-hundred year old philosophers
like Locke used an essentially Christian metaphysics to define such
important concepts as "natural rights" and "equality under the law,"
and today's contemporary materialists can say nothing more than "the
answer is, there is no answer," then score one for the three-hundred
year old philosopher.

My strong opinion, then, is that the religious impulse is yet another
source of truth that can fill these voids. However, two things are
necessary to move foward in this direction. The first, quite
obviously, is simple recognition that the religious impulse itself
should be leveraged, not defeated. Not for nothing have both new
atheists writiers and outspoken atheists scientists like E. O. Wilson
have called for something very much like "secular churches" for the
defense of ideals they cherish - ideals their personal philosophies
unfortunately yield no backing for. There seems to be a growing sense
that the loss of a particular type of religious experience is a
growing problem - in particular, that of the mainline "wishy-washy"
Protestentism that wasted little time defending its own creeds and
dogmas and instead spent its effort on the building of social capital,
community, shared purpose and a committment to responsible
participative governance. If this is a fuzzy ideal of a church that
perhaps never existed, it is all the more need then to support those
institutions where they do exist.

The other thing that is necessary comes from the defenders of
religion. Namely, pick the turf you choose to defend carefully.  When
I say that there is uncovered ground in philosophy, this is a call to
action. Fields like ethics and collective values are an imperative of
the time, as is the search for global ethics that lead to a better
society. While there may be many materialists who think that calls to
global ethics are sentimental nonsense, most do not, particularly
since they fear the spread of the opposite: unjust chauvinistic
societies which find educated pointy-headed philosophers and
scientists to be the convenient targets of their deadly purges. There
is plenty to back such ideals up within the religious impulse
too. However, the call for religion to contribute is a fraught one,
since so many followers of religions have negative contributions to
give.

Religion, far from having a pure contribution to discourse, is tied to
culture, and as such, religion is frequently weighted weighted with
the baggage of culturally convenient untruths. For every religious
follower whose heart burns with love for one's fellow man, it seems
you will have another fanatic religious follower who is seemingly
blind to any spiritual impulses yet is happy to use religion as a tool
to elevate his own preference. One cannot simply use religion as an
answer, when so much of it consists of harmful cultural practices;
only a religion stripped bare of this overlay can meaningfully
contribute to philosophical discussions.

The other problem religion has contributing is the fact that even
aside from cultural baggage, one has the baggage of excessive doctrine
weighing it down. Through the end of the nineteenth century, theism
still had its defenders in the academy, mainly in the form of idealist
movements. Such movements, however, were generally handicapped by
their marriage to a Protestant christianity chained to a considerable
intellectual overhead in the form of unprovable sectarian
doctrines. Some idealists were fit to pose a "God of the
philosophers," postulating a space for defense of such abstract ideas
as The Good and Justice. But others indulged in apologetics, given
their self-imposed need to defend core Christian concepts, such as the
ostensibly singular nature of the Christ figure and fantastic miracles
proven only by successive retellings. Contemporary popular defenses of
theism are sometimes so driven by the need to "testify" to this world
view that they spend their time literally preaching to the choir, and
thereby weakening their arguments so much as to be useless to the
wider discussion outside of their own narrow creeds.

For religiously-oriented philosophers to contribute in this
discussion, therefore, they must make hard decisions. We have, on one
hand, a religious impulse, seemingly shared by all humans, in which
certain concepts are acknowledged to exist, and can be defended in
spite of their immateriality due to the grounding they give to ethics
and the search for purpose and meaning. And we have on the other hand,
the religious creeds themselves, which tend to weigh down their
intellectual contributions with a host of philosophically indefensible
or inconsistent beliefs. Philosophers of religion must rededicate
themselves to taking Occam's razor to their own beliefs, realizing
that any idiosyncratic belief they may have in their distinctive creeds are,
more likely than not, contigent and accidental in nature. It is one
thing to pose the existence of a deity or being in accordance with
Anselm's proofs, and posit some loosely defined human spirit as being
identical with the Mind of dualism. It is yet another thing to insist
on a host of doctrinal beliefs - miraculous resurrections, theories of
original sin, the godhead as trinity, virgin births, inerrant
scripture - as part and parcel of this defense. Given the
contributions theistic philosophers can make to this discussion, they
have every reason to keep their writings free from apologetics, which
only serve to distinguish their own narrow creeds. The needs of the
hour are too great to do otherwise.





(1) To this objection, these new atheists will no doubt indicate that
these movements are supported by the ever-shinking religious minority.
This is mainly based on the fact that they view all religious
believers as an undifferentiated mass. The main thing that must be
pointed out is that support for nationalists is strongest by far among
those who claim a religious identity _but do not practice their
religion_. Examination will show that among dedicated believers, these
movements have far less support. Lest such atheist writers thing I am
practicing the "true scotsmans" fallacy, it must be noted that a large
chunk of the alt-right are self-proclaimed atheists who feel their
religion is cultural signifier only. While atheism itself is not at
fault for these defective views, it is plain that practicing an
atheistic creed does not automatically make one a defender of liberal
democracies. Serious atheistic philosophers such as John Gray have
been vocal in pointing out that atheism, far from being conducive to
ethical conduct and democracy, settles nothing in the ethical sense,
so it isn't just the religious that have problems with this line of
reasoning.
