---
title: About the, um, benefits of drinking
---

[So now we see some correction to the odd conventional wisdom that
moderate drinking is good for
you](https://www.vox.com/2018/4/24/17242720/alcohol-health-risks-facts). It
turns out moderate drinking doesn't really help or hurt. And oh,
moderate means _very_ moderate: a few drinks a week. And anything more
than that is a problem. Just one or two days of binging on the
weekend is enough to tip it into the unhealthy zone.

Color me completely unsurprised.

Much has been written about the collapse of journalistic standards
over the last twenty years. I'm not so sure; I think perhaps what is
"popular interest" is much worse, but the serious and longform
journalism are much as they have always been. But in reality, the
"serious" stories in the news are nothing but AP feeds anyway. But
"popular interest" is worse, and that is what gets read, and the
source of much of this journalist nonsense is internet-driven
clickbait. And science reporting, ever sensationalistic, has suffered
all the more for it.

It was pretty obvious at the outset that these p-hacked papers
reporting the benefits of moderate drinking were the worst sort of
science reporting; i.e.
- pick a counterintuitive story based on one (1) academic study that
had not yet been replicated
- and better yet, something that made people feel good about
themselves and
- watch the article forwards and page clicks start piling up!

The thing that irritates me is I had this conventional wisdom preached
at me for twenty years, without any thought given to whether it was
true or not. The unexciting follow-on studies that said "we can't
replicate this" were dutifully ignore. Everyone knows about [the
replicaiton crisis in
science](https://fabiusmaximus.com/2016/04/19/replication-crisis-in-science-95394/)
but corrections are never reported, as that is just _sooo
boring_.

Why am I irritated, by this in particular? It is because I am a
teetotaler. And this particular bit of convenional wisdom has stuck in
my craw.

Let's be clear, I _choose_ not to drink, period. While my main reason
is adherence to a religious code (I'm a practicing Baha'i), I have
never once attempted to impose this on anyone else. I have never
evangelized for my position. I've never used nondrinking as an excuse
not to socialize; when out, have always adjusted tips accordingly to
ensure I compensate for using whatever space I'm using at the bar, and
have generally done little to draw attention to my nondrinking.

So, to reiterate, the three people I'm doing this for are me, myself
and I. It is a point of neither pride nor shame.

And yet... if I divulge this fact to someone else, I find that a
remarkable number of people are slightly offended.

Normally this is not much of an issue - the men who have been offended
(almost always men) were generally "alpha male" bros that bought into
this nonsense that Real Men are Hard Drinking. The fewer such people I
have in my life, the better. But the problem is that for years, this
study gave gave medical professionals an excuse to shove this crap
down my throat. "NEVER? You don't drink, ever? You know you could
reduce your health risk if you chose to drink moderately." By all
means, I was free to ignore that advice. Still, I find it irritating
that people feel they must justify their personal choices by
denigrating those that choose differently.

So hopefully at least this will cease.

Life is not a morality play. You extract morals as you can, from a
messy life that doesn't easily spell out lessons for you. So I
shouldn't immediately extract "life lessons" from this. But it does
remind me of a few things.

First of all, p-hacking is real, and scientific journalism is
remarkably susceptible to it. Journalists really don't cover news and
research. Their language makes clear what they are telling - they say
"I'm working on a _story_." Nonfiction it may be, but it's always a
_story_ - that is, - a nice, easy-to-digest narrative that fits into
one of the seven or eight great storytelling scripts, a "narrative
arc." And if an interesting-sounding p-hacked scientific
fake-discovery can fit into favorite narrative, like "a voice calling
out in the wilderness" or a "prodigal son" or a "battle against the
status quo" or any one of these other fill-in-the-blanks narrative
arcs, it will be trumpeted as the next greatest thing, not because it
is, but because it makes for a good story that will get lots of
clicks.

Second, "reverse-puritanism" is no better than puritanism. If someone
chooses not to drink or chooses not to eat meat or chooses not to stay
up late on the weekends or stay at home with the kids or drive a
fuel-efficient car and yada yada then guess what. *It's not about
you.* They didn't do it just to piss you off, and there is no logical
reason it should lessening your enjoyment when you choose to do
otherwise. And, I might add, you have no right to complain about
people being "smug" if those people never boast, brag or even tell
anyone about these choices. These reactions are psychological
projection. Reverse puratinism, far from being some sort of defense of
the joy of life, is nothing more than defensiveness and unresolved guilt
writ large, an extension of the adolescent urges to to rail against
rules and limits but feel needy and abandoned if you can't get your
buddies to join along with you.