---
title: Revisiting Josiah Royce
category: in-progress
---

# Revisiting Josiah Royce
I have elsewhere published a post detailing the [loss of interest in
certain philosophical topics in the early twentieth
century](the-three-voids-of-philosophy). I have also elsewhere
detailed, in a [too-long blog post](whither-idealism), the extirpation
of idealism as a respected philosophy by the late twentieth century,
mainly due to the fact that western philosophy (at least in the
English-speaking world) seemed to have abandoned many fruitful lines
of inquiry and settled, instead, on certain fixed, constrained
concerns. This post begins a series of posts - a small corrective,
giving an overview of an interesting, distinctive American philosopher
who seemed forgotten for a time, yet remains of interest for anyone
interested in spirituality and religious community life.

Here's a repeat of a quote I'm reusing from a prior blog post, just to
set the motive:

    If you should ask a thousand persons, "What are the proofs of the
    reality of Divinity?" perhaps not one would be able to answer. If
    you should ask further, "What proofs have you regarding the
    essence of God?" "How do you explain inspiration and revelation?"
    "What are the evidences of conscious intelligence beyond the
    material universe?" "Can you suggest a plan and method for the
    betterment of human moralities?" "Can you clearly define and
    differentiate the world of nature and the world of Divinity?" --
    you would receive very little real knowledge and enlightenment
    upon these questions. This is due to the fact that development of
    the ideal virtues has been neglected. People speak of Divinity,
    but the ideas and beliefs they have of Divinity are, in reality,
    superstition.  -- 'Abdu'l-Baha

What does one do, if one wishes to study once-vital concepts such
as ideas of "divinity" and "human purpose"? Particularly when most
serious philosophers are atheistic by creed, and functionally
agnostic? Is there anything remotely "modern"? Something that doesn't
reek of uneducated evangelism, or flog a sectarian agenda?

To this end, I'd like to introduce:

    Josiah Royce (1855-1916)

Never heard of him, eh? Well, it's not surprising. He fell out of
interest, along with his idealistic contemporaries, about eighty years
ago, and for perhaps sixty long years afterward his works were hardly
touched. It's high time his works were revisited, if for no other
reason than the quote from 'Abdu'l-Baha above: the serious study of
the "divine," independent of any relgious creeds. Additionally, many of
his concers still seem strikingly modern and particularly "American";
unsurprising, if you agree with me that study of "the divine virtues"
must in the end prescribe duties on how we must treat our fellow men.

Josiah Royce was a now-obscure proponent of a philosophical school you
might call "American Idealism." He is generally lumped in with his
across-the-ocean cousins, the "British Idealists" of the late
nineteenth centry that fell badly out of favor when the analytic
philosophy took over the field within the English-speaking
world. While Royce was an idealist, he was also a contemporary of the
early pioneers of an influential American philosophical school called
Pragmatism, and his influence of and by the pragmatists sets him apart
from pure idealists. His later works, in particular, incorporated
pragmatist writer C. S. Pierce's idea of *signs* as metaphysically
significant. His intellectual sparring partner was William James, and
they held each other in the greatest respect. Unfortunately, after his
death his reputation fell on hard times, when in the early twentieth
century, Bertrand Russel, G. E. Moore and their contemporaries set a
more positivist tone for philosophy in the twentieth century. The
school of British Idealism lived on in a much more limited fashin in
midcentury writers known more for their conservatism than their
idealism; e.g., Oakenshott.

This is unfortunate. Royce and other related writers have much to say
about the "divine philosophy," all without ever straying too much into
sectarian ideology or the dogmas of their own chosen faiths. While it
is obvious Royce was clearly at home speaking to his Protestant
bretheren, his arguents are applicable to any theism. My opinion is
Baha'is, and anyone interested in spirituality and the functioning of
spiritual communities, would benefit greatly from revisiting this
underappreciated philosopher. While covering writings more than a
century ould would would seem to mean reviewing arguments that have
long been shown obsolete, if only due to the march of science, this is
not the case for the bulk of his writings. In a series of posts, I'd
like to discuss some of the topics covered by Royce's writing that
would benefit Baha'i scholarship. It is a lengthy post, intended to
give an overview of some major writings, and to serve as field notes
so I can come back to this later.

## Josiah Royce: Some Critical Ideas

For all his popular obscurity, it seems there has been a small
resurgence of interest in Josiah Royce within philosophical fields,
and not only for historical reasons; if you look at [his entry in the
Stamford Encylopedia of
Philosopy](https://plato.stanford.edu/search/r?entry=/entries/royce/&page=1&total_hits=45&pagesize=10&archive=None&rank=0&query=josiah%20royce),
you'll find a sizeable analysis of his main ideas. That article covers
far more of his writings, far more authoritatively than I can cover in
a single post. If you wish to read him directly, this is easy, thanks
to Amazon's inclusion in their Kindle selection of _The Basic Writings
of Josiah Royce, Volumes I and II_ (ed. John McDermott Fordham
University Press 2015). Thanks to the release of the Open Access
edition in 2018, this massive volume cost me a grand total of four
bucks. The writings therein cover all of his significant arguments,
and these blogs posts cover writings exclusively from those.

What's in there? A lot about metaphysics (the underlying nature of
things), epistemology (how we know things) and logic. There are
interesting in and of themselves; in his writings, Royce reveals
himself to be a bridge between the Hegelenianism of his younger
studies and the America pragmatists whome he corresponded frequently
with. But for anyone interested in spirituality and spiritual
community life, he has particular concerns that make study
rewarding. A quick scan of the titles will show an eagerness to
backfill the void in the "development of the ideal virtues" created
when science and materialist philosophies raced ahead in early
twentieth century development: study of concepts such as "the
conception of God," "monotheism, "immortality," "conceptions of Being"
set him apart from his contemporary positivists (materialists) eager
to scrub their writings free from mention of anything vaguely spitual,
while concerns like "the Great Community," "international insurance,"
"provincialism" and "race questions" mark him as someone concerned
enough with applying philosophy to the issues of his day that he does
not limit himself to areas where rigorous thinking alone cannot
guarantee freedom from error. While I admire the eagerness of the
analytic philosophers for rigor and respect their foundationalism,
their tools to not lend themselves to analysis of these concerns. My
feeling is no matter what your job, when you have a difficult problem,
you are not allowed to punt just because you don't have a tool
available to make it easier.

There is a lot to go on; I have neither the time to write, and you
won't have the patience to read through, a blow-by-blow synopsis of
his main areas of thought. The series of posts will concentrate on
three particular areas:

* his idealistic writings;
* his social writings;
* his theological writings.

This omits many particularly interesting writings. For instance, some
of his best work is on logic, but that will not be covered. His
logical work clearly anticipates the analytic school of philosophy;
but because so much work has done in that area, attention to his work
has suffered. I remarked that much of Royce's writings have not been
turned obsolete by the march of science; unfortunately (or rather,
fortunately), that is not true for his logic writings, as so many
others have picked up the baton of formal logic. As a result, his
logic writings are probably of interests to specialists only, who know
enough to distinguish what is still novel from what has been rendered
disproven or obsolete - I certainly do not. Likewise, Royce started
out not as a philosopher, but as a historian and "man of letters." But
however interesting his work is on topics likes early California mining
communities may be, I must pass over that.

So enough with the chatter: three subsequent posts will detail the
above areas, concentrating on summarizing writings from _The Basic
Writings of Josiah Royce_. I hope you'll forgive my "book review"
format; I'm partly writing this for my own reasons, but I'm also
writing this so readers can get a more detailed flavor of the
writings, and read for themselves if they find an argument of
particular interest.

Next up - the idealistic writings. (I'm talking philosophical
idealism, don't'cha know.)
