---
title: The State of Jazz, 2020
---

# The State of Jazz, 2020
Right now as I'm finishing this, it is early November 2019. In less
than 2 months, we will be starting the new "decade." Yes, I'm using
this in quotes because I know the decade really starts 2021, but
people really care about the tens digit. For both music columnists and
their fans, this is a fun time, as critics throw up their lists of the
top albums of the decade, and wait as the page hits and comments roll
in. For readers it's fun too, particularly since all but the most
obsessive fans don't give music sites more than an occasional glance,
and just want ideas on what's good that they don't yet know about.

So being a jazz fan, I'm still waiting for the critics to come out
with their own lists, but unfortunately I still haven't seen much
posted! Hopefully things will rectify themselves quickly, because
things are more interesting now then they have been for a while.

If it continues to be idle, I'm posting my own darn list.

I hesitate to say there's a rebirth in jazz. After all, boosters are
*always* saying this. And interesting stuff has always been there,
mostly ignored. But while sales figures for jazz albums are still
quite tepid, at least I'm regularly seeing jazz reviewed regularly
now. And not the traditionalists stuff that's "jazz is supposed to be" -
the sort of fusty, Stanly Crouch-approved acoustic stuff that the
jazz police tried to lock in amber for future generations. No, I'm
talking the interesting stuff actual jazz musicians themselves listen
to. Lately we're getting a lot of extremely creative works influenced
by R&B and electronica, but which is still plainly identifiable as
Jazz. The result is a remarkable upswing in the amount of new jazz
which interesting, even if it hasn't achieved mass success. Flying
Lotus and The Comet is Coming don't sound anything like jazz as people
ordinarily think of it - yet you'd have to classify both as jazz.

What's the explanation? I have my theories. Perhaps it's Spotify, or
streaming in general. If it's possible to immediately pull up a deep
playlist of classic Blue Note tunes, it's a heck of a lot harder to
make money with a revivalist combo doing inferior versions of the
originals. Or perhaps it's the death of "smooth jazz," an unlistenable
hybrid served up to non-jazz listeners that nevertheless allowed a lot
of jazz musicians to to live comfortably, at the cost of, well, not
making good jazz music. Perhaps it's the dominance of R&B in the pop
chart. Jazz has always borrowed aggressively from R&B (and vice
versa!), and popular R&B, unlock Rock, has never been instrumentally
oriented. If you are an R&B musician and are easily bored, you're
going to do jazz on the side. More pop means more good jazz, if only
because that's the only alternative left for studio musicians tired of
playing backup on beats-driven autotuned technopop numbers.

(SIDEBAR: (**Rant**) One thing I want to shoot down is any claim that
pop is better nowadays than it's ever been. Many pop critics claim
that we're in a "golden age of Pop." This is true only if you look at
the *very best* stuff being released. Tons of pop is being recorded;
of course some of it is going to be good. It may be another twenty
years before someone tops _To Pimp a Butterfly_. But the overall
quality is just as poor as it's ever been. When I go to the gym, as
I've been doing (to little practical effect) for 30 years, the
dance-pop blasting from the speakers is just as lame-brained and
tedious as it ever was. The fact that an R&B station might play a Kali
Uchis or Frank Ocean song once in a blue moon does not make up for the
abominable repetitious rap/pop that they pad their playlist with.  The
ever-present autotune and drum machine just makes it ever more obvious
that computers will one day conquer the pop charts, just as surely as
they conquered chess and go. When that happens, pop music will be no
better or worse than it currently is, but at least entertainment
reporters will be forced to stop treating pop performers as if they
have something to say about art, least of all from those performers
who obviously spend more time with their personal trainer than they do
with their music. (**EndRant**))

But lastly, I think the reason jazz is so vibrant is that "jazz" is
finally dead.

There is a difference between jazz and "jazz." Jazz is a vibrant music
form based on improvisation that is generally instrumental and aspires
to be more "serious" than popular music, while at the same time
borrowing heavily from it. "Jazz," on the other hand, is a
backward-looking art form that peaked with the (in)famous Ken Burns
documentary and had a brief rebirth with the "Young Lions" of the
eighties but in spite of this flurrly of activity, the movement never
produced their own must-have classics in jazz libraries. I say this is
spite of the fact I loved some of the "straight-ahead" work of the
period; e.g. Tony Williams' hard bop band. The problem is, it isn't
hard to be technically better than Miles Davis; but to make an entry
into the classic Jazz canon, you have to be as creative as him. As
such, people are far more likely to buy records from the fifties and
sixties than the technically superior takes on the same styles by
straight-ahead musicians in the eighties.

Fortunately, musicians seem to have abandoned "jazz" in favor of jazz,
and jazz is all the much better for it. This isn't to say that they've
abandoned *the traditions* ("oh the horror"), but even overtly
revivalist acts, say, Sons of Kemet (which plays a NOLA-style of jazz,
complete with tuba!) seem bent on having a compelling musical message
of their own. The result is that when the list of best jazz records of the
2010s are compiled, I'm sure you will have a long list of records that
could _only_ be placed in the 2010s chronologically - rather than a
pale reflection of past grandeurs. And handful of these might even be
remembered thirty years from now.

Coda: It is with some regret that I can't say the same for rock. At
the end of the aughts, there was a lot of interesting movements in
rock as the indie scene started to flirt with stuff that was a little
prog-y (think The Battles, Animal Collective, TV On the Radio, etc.),
but it seems the movement died off, lacking both commercial and
critical attention. I'm not sure why rock has gotten so barren but I
have my theories - the development of the "indie landfill" and rock
critics who think their job is to enforce the amateurism of punk rock
being foremost among them. But these developments happened quite long
ago, yet rock itself seems unable to shake its creative funk. The
other day I bought something from The Claypool Lennon Delirium. It was
fun - it reminded me of a cross between Todd Rundgren's Utopia and (of
course) The Beatles. No classic, but still pretty good. But unfortunately,
acts like that are few and far between. Of the acts that might get
radio play today, I can't think of a single non-Radiohead album
that doesn't sound like a less enjoyable version of something from the
seventies. (OK, so *maybe* War on Drugs is an exception.)

But that's is a topic for another day. Here's to a great ten years of
jazz and hoping for another ten.
