---
title: Miscellaneous Thoughts of Early 2019
---

## A few miscellaneous subjects
I've taken a break from my usual blogging (the prior post is one I sat
on for months before actually hitting the "publish" button).  Not that
anyone is going to notice or care. I'm not advertising this blog in
any way, and I'm certainly not going to start. One reason I've
stopped, in fact, is I was concerned I had nothing to say that no one
else could say better. After some correspondence with some very
helpful instructors at the Wilmett Institute (thank you Sergeev!!), I
think I need to step back and actually learn a few things before I
reflect my thoughts back to everyone in general.

There are, however, a few things I wanted to put down before the
passing of the quarter.

### Virtue Improvement

The prior year I developed a regimen based on Baha'i spiritual
practices as a means for improving myself. In particular, a block of
time spent every evening to prayer, meditation, and self
reflection. Was it a success? Well, it was a successful
_experiment_. Here is what I learned.

First, it was worthwhile and I will continue this habit as long as I
can. As a Baha'i of course, I have to do something like that - these
are, after all, Baha'i laws and advice, and while I could cut back and
do a bare minimum in ten minutes, that would be counterproductive,
since the idea is self improvment. Based on my experience, I would say
you need to dedicate a block of at least 20 minutes each evening to
this (30 minutes is a little more comfortable), and you can't really
skip more than a day without feeling a loss in this area. On the other
hand, I had difficulty spending more than 30 minutes on this. I
suspect that even if I were able to spend significantly more time on
this - an hour or more - I wouldn't get any additional benefit.

Second, as far as developing virtue based on this - the jury is still
out. I didn't feel much improvement in my temperment. My inclination
to use foul language at the computer is still the same. I'm not sure
if I feel nicer or more social, though perhaps that may have gotten a
little better - my baseline is so low that any
improvement should be obvious, but perhaps that is not the case. In
any case, it seems this is not a magic cure-all for obstacles to
virtuous conduct.

However, I have noticed that my focus and ability to learn is a bit
rejuvenated. If I do this _consistently_, then I'm able to focus and
get more out of today. That isn't perhaps what I wanted - I'm plenty
productive, and being more productive in the late evening, when I
should go to bed anyway, is hardly what I needed. I do think if one's
goal is to pick up a good habit, then this sort or regimen is exactly
what one needs.

So perhaps this is not so much about improving virtue as it is about
laying the groundwork for virtuee.

One specific note regarding self-reflection ("bring thyself to account
each day"). This has actually proven hard to do effectively.  I'd
hoped journaling would be an effective means of focusing the mind on
this. My experience is a little mixed, mainly because of my own
personality. I'm prone to rumination, excessive reliving of my own
mistakes and a general depressed personality. I soon noticed in my
journaling that I was engaging in exactly these activities, which was
counterproductive to my own self-improvement. I've looked at a few
journals with writing prompts; some are helpful, but many are very
self indulgent. I'll be changing to a schedule where I limit my time
of journaling to just one sentence, dedicate most days to thinking of
perhaps one or two things that day, and occasionally revisiting other
pre-filled journals. We'll see how that goes.

### Philosophy: the Quantum Mechanics Rabbit-Hole

As per the advice I received autumn 2018, I've begun a reading course
on contemporary philosophy with Sergeev's help - he's been
particularly helpful picking out seminal "continental" works. I read a
few things - C. S. Pierce was good but not as wide-ranging as I
imagined (though it could've been my reading selections), while
William James' *Varieties of Religious Experience* was far more
enlightening and up-to-date than I had any right to expect from a
century-old work.

Having interest, however, in consciousness, metaphysics and ultimate
reality, anything contemporary is going to bump against quantum
mechanics. And this seems to be something of a rabbit-hole,
particularly to lay philosophers, happy to press their own new-agey
theories. In the worst case, the language of quantum mechanics serves
as a sort of pseudoscientific language to describe theories based on
nothing more than magical thinking.

I've been a little stymied in my reading from a number of writers who
seem to propound their own pet theories about subjectivity and the
subject/observer duality and parallel universes in great detal, while
spelling out their own understaning of quantum mechanics not at
all. The mistake less-skilled thinkers make is to let the confusing
nature of quantum mechanics serve as a scaffold for supporting one's
own pet notion about how the universe works. Unfortunately, as
confusing as quantum mechanics is, the nature of low-level particals
as "clouds of uncertainty" seem to have made itself manifest as a
"cloud of confusion" in which one can propound all sorts of theories
without obvious refutation. I'm presently reading a confusing book
claiming to relate quantum mechanics to the philosophy of Alfred North
Whitehead. I'm not going to read more. I need to learn much more about
both quantum mechanics and Alfred North Whitehead; once I do, I
suspect the book will either be superfluous, or found to be nonsense.

In summary, given the fact the proponents of Ayn Rand regard quantum
mechanics as some sort of heresy, I'm even more inclined to believe
that it is philosophically significant. But it doesn't mean you get to
believe in magic.

### Professional update: Artificial Intelligence course

A bit of whiplash as I turn toward a professional interest.

I'm presently auditing an edX course in Artifical Intelligence, this
one offered by Columbia Univeristy. I'm happy to report that this is a
very appropriate level of difficulty for a hardcore engineer; I've had
problems with other MOOC courses which are so introductory in nature
that my impatience and skipping around meant I didn't have the
patience to sit through them. So if you're an engineer, not an
undergrad, this is the course for you.

One word of advice - I've been told, by recruiters and the
professional press, that the field of Artificial Intelligence has
change a great deal since I received my PhD in it over 20 years
ago. In part, I was concerned that my schooling had become obsolete
during that time, and I needed a refresher course.

I'm not sure if I'm happy or sad about it, but this has turned out to
be not at all true. If you're in the same boat as me - had a lot of
old artifical intelligence classes - your schooling is not
obsolete. Admittedly, if you spent a lot of time researching knowledge
representation and blackboard systems, you wouldn't find an easy way
to leverage your knowledge. But the basic concepts are still there.

Of the 12 units we are covering, I would say 8 are exact recaps
of things we went over in grad school over twenty years ago. There
absolutely are new topics, but even those are not based on new
theories; they were just covered in different classes. While I've
definitely gotten rusty at some of this, most of this is only
refresher. And those I never studied (e.g. Boltzmann machines, SVM)
were things I had heard of, they just weren't covered in the
particular coursework I had.

I will say that from the _recruiter's_ perspective, the shift has been
real. This is because job prospects are less promising than what they
first appear. One would think from the popular press that compaines
are desparate to hire artificial intelligence researchers and that
this is a hot field in all sorts of areas. This is unfortunately far
from the truth. The sad fact is there are only a few ways artificial
intelligence is being widely used:

1. To drive traffic to more ads
2. To drive traffic to more paid posts
3. To drive traffic toward addictive behaviors

And indeed, solutions to these problems have little to do with classical AI
techniques. Instead, all of these are amenable to "deep learning,"
which is really another word for neural networks with a few additional
hidden layers, something we didn't have techniques for handling in the
nineties. This is a narrow subfield for a narrow business case, where
for the present, job candidates can name their price. Unfortunately in
two years, when the field is flooded, it will be bereft of the
eye-popping salaries responsible for the popularity of the field.

When I graduated with my PhD, I wasn't able to find any jobs that
leveraged my background. If I graduated now, and I didn't want to sell
ads or inculcate additive behaviors, that still would probably be the
case. In any event, given the widespread commercialization of these
technologies and availability of open source libraries, my advice is
to think of ways to use this in the normal course of work rather than
think of this as a special field - software developers using artifical
intelligence, rather than artificial intelligence developers.

### Finally, to all Baha'is out there: Happy New Year! And have a great 176!