---
title: To That Guy Who Wrote That Screed
---
## Some REAL Advice to the Guy Who Wrote That Google Screed (or: not repeating my mistakes)
The following is a post I wrote after a spate of news which saw in the
headlines various issues such as a high profile firing of an opponent
of HR practices at Google and various alt right movements. I put it
aside because at the time I felt it a little self-indulgent - who
needs my personal thought on the matter, after all? But this is also
in response to a New York Times article discussing our declining
birthrates in the US. One reason for it is many women not having
suitable partners; and one reason for that, in my opinion, is a lack
of men acting like Grownups around women. So that is one reason I'm
ressurecting this post.

Meanwhile, there is another problem. Every day it seems there are more
angry male clowns populating our society. Alt-right, gamergate, Proud
Boys, incels, you name it. Unhappy males claiming that they are
victims of conniving femenazis who have overturned The Natural
Order. This also includes aforementioned employee at a large
technology organization, whose name I shall not mention, that over a
year ago decided to dispute his HR department's uncontrovertial role
of outreach to women, causing what was probably an intentional media
firestorm, using nothing more than reams of tenditious research and
[an undiscolosed, unacknowledge right-wing support
network](https://www.wired.com/story/the-dirty-war-over-diversity-inside-google/)
(Not sure why companies like Google have outreach to women engineers,
maybe it's becaus they inexplicably make up half of the paid
workforce. Go figure.)

Inconcievably, such people think of themselves as victims. Ironically
they are. But not for the reason they think they are!

HENCE, THIS BLOG POST. People in alt-right thug groups are perhaps
beyond reaching, but some of their fellow travelers are not. This blog
post is not just to
[http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2017/08/07/google_fires_engineer_who_authored_anti_diversity_memo.html](that
guy, the guy who wrote)
[https://gizmodo.com/exclusive-heres-the-full-10-page-anti-diversity-screed-1797564320](this,
um, thing). And indeed, it isn't just to alt-righters, though that's
what inspired this rant. Instead, I'm also talking to YOU, they
hard-luck fella who is surrounded by other fellow-traveller single
guys who love to blame their problems on other people.  And this too
is to any guy who has ever been contaminated by contact with certain
proponents of conservatism, or an aggressive strain of "evolutionary
psychology," or high-priced "dating consultants."

Yes, you're victims. But not vitims of feminists, "the left," or
whatever bogeyman you are blaming for your predicament. I don't think
your problem is that you are discriminated against, or that as a guy
everyone overlooks your needs, or that society no longer values men as
necessary. So if you're still with me, I know the root cause of why
you're so upset:

Your problem is you aren't getting any. Amirite?

And for those of you who do not fall into this subset, and may be
inclined to read something more into the rise of the alt right,
perhaps something more complicated, or nuanced, or structurally
"deep," let's look at the source of a primary mandate of The
Proud Boys, a group that combines all of the alt-right movements into an
organization with it's own, distinctive, uh, flavor. This is from an
[article about the Proud Boys on a conservative-leaning website](http://thefederalist.com/2017/10/06/proud-boys-and-porn/)

    [Proud Boys founder] Gavin wanted the guys to stop masturbating,
    go out, talk to women, and then marry them, procreate, be strong
    American family men, help restore the natural order of things that
    had been knocked out of wack by feminism...

So, yeah... sounds like the motivating factor is these guys just can't
get any. And are blaming it all on femenism, because Reasons.

So: this column. This is a very special column, mostly to single
men. It contains what I learned over so many years that you need to
know and do in order to be a Grownup male but also happy and single a
the same time. This is to any single male whose ignorance leads them
to behave in mistaken, jerk-like behavior that leaves them
romantically unsuccessful. I always wanted to help out the younger
guys avoid the stupid mistakes of my youth, and now I can do this and
fight fascism at the same time.

In all seriousness, though:

I do not do this lightly. I was horribly unsuccessful in my romantic
life for many years, and I leared everything the hard way. For over
fifteen years it was a source of shame. Why did I suffer so? The
reasons are legion, due to various forms of cluelessness. But I'm not
alone; most guys figure this out after too many years bumping around
in the dark. And if by chance it befitis gamergaters and incels
without ever fixing their mistaken beliefs, there is still benefit to
society since it is obvious they will continue making everyone
miserable until they "get some," and better still if I can empty at
least a little garbage from their heads. And maybe single
women will benefit by the improved behavior of the men who read
this.

But first I need to make an important digression to debunk a certain
self-help movement for men. This is especially to the educated and
self-educated guys. This movement is making your problems worse. Every
self-help movement has its favorite pseudoscience, and a lot of guys,
from the unhappy alt-right basement dwellers to just as unhappy
engineers and finance geeks have their very own pseudoscience. This
psychological movement claims to explain why they are so unsuccessful
in love, why femminism is so *horrible*, and how they can become
"winners" just by taking the "red pill" of knowledge said to explain
women and how to ~~conquer~~ pair up with them. I need to demolish
this pseudoscience before I get to the good stuff.

### A Digression into Evolutionary Psychology

Yes, evolutionary psychology. The unwilling intellectual jalopy of the
conservative male-rights movement.

Evolutionary psychology is an honest-to-goodness field, but unlike
many serious fields of study, if it did not exist, someone would have
invented it for selfish reasons. This new field has the unfortunate
fate of may of its findings conveniently lining up with certain
conservative ideas about sex roles. In its less rigorous forms, it has
has been pressed into service in two ways that its exponents probably
never intended: as a basis for both conservative pseudointellectual
nonsense about natural gender roles, and as intellectual fodder to
help self-styled "dating experts" extract money from unhappy single
men.

I suppose evolutionary psychology started out like a lot of
pop-psychology fads do. In the 80s and 90s some psychologists found
some interesting things using rigorous, statistical experiments and
put some psychology theories in place. They posited that _some_ of
these effects may be due to evolutionary pressures. Most of these
sound kind of-common sense, and focus on how women pick mates for
evolutionary matters; preferring symmetrical, physicially strong men,
for instance. Women like cues for dominance; men like a particular
waist-hip ratio across all cultures because it indicates
fertility. Plenty of stuff where you think "oh, so I guess that makes
sense." So far, so good. There are lots of promising leads and
conclusions, many of which vanish under replicated studies. There is
no shame in this; science is hard. New replicable findings are rare
indeed compared to promising leads that disappear in replicated
studies; this is just how "real science" works.

Over time though, these studies started making their way into the
popular press, and you saw more books appear which were less rigorous
and more self-helpy as they found their niche. Unlike most self-helpy
books, these books didn't target bookish women. They targeted men -
mostly men who weren't getting any. An apparently underserved market,
and a lucrative one, given that well-off lonely men are willing to
part with enormous amounts of money to alleviate the situation.

Now about the Google guy and the alt-righters: look at any of their
writings and you will see tons of citations on evolutionar psychology.
It seems obvious why evolutionary psychology appeals to the more
classically "conservative" mindset, in that it presumes there are sex
roles fixed by Mother Nature that all adhere to. In the case of the
guy fired from google for writing this "anti-PC" screed that posits
why there are so few women working there as engineers, it's almost
certain these evolutionary psychology studies are the source of most
of the "evidence" he cited in the screed that got him fired. But that
doesn't explain _why he read up on this stuff in the first place_, and
became so versed in this field that he had no trouble littering his
manifesto with thorough footnotes. No, I'm sure the reason most people
read this information is the same reason everyone else who would
otherwise have no interest in psychology started reading it - because
they're looking for help with dating.

Unfortunately, unhappy single men are everywhere, regardless of the
political spectrum. And that makes a powerful grift for psychologists,
lecturers and other "experts."  I have no firsthand knowledge of in
Silicon Valley, but I plenty of secondhand knowledge and can hazard a
pretty good guess. I was in Austin in the nineties when I came across
a very similar scene, which was: too many educated, well-paid geeky
guys with not enough women to date. The place was full of unhappy men
who arrived at the far side of four grueling years of college in a
technical field, possibly with equally rigorous graduate degrees,
hoping for their life to finally begin. Only to find themselves
unwittingly conscripted into the life of a monk, with both a workplace
and social life filled with unattached men and devoid of women. So the
single men, having solved one problem, were faced with another, and
the place was full of "evolutionary psychologists" and "dating
consultants" looking to help guys get dates.

The "dating consultant" can be was a pretty impressive grift. An
actual psychologist will be on the level with you - they can solve
your personality but can't fix the fact your chosen setting is a
sausage fest. But many of the consultants will promis they can help
you. Unfortunately, they're only slightly more reputable-looking
versions of the "Pick Up Artist" Jedi Masters, and the dynamic of the
sales pitch is the same:

* High-priced consultant tells you that you *should* be getting more
  dates;
* And that *he* can help you;
* But only if you follow his or her advice *exactly*;
* And if you are unsuccessful, you will be
  blameworthy because you did *not* following this advice.

A pretty unhealthy dynamic, but one that can make the consultant a lot
of mony at a hundred fifty dollars a session. These single guys want a
solution, and dating consultants promise one, using "evolutionary
psychology." Posing all sorts of indirect mechanisms to explain things
to men who haven't been successful with women, they can easily coninve
them this secret knowledge is the key to success for women. This was
the holy grail to these poor guys, who were usually convinced that the
average Joe was getting laid with beautiful women all the time. These
men were flummoxed, angry with themselves and angry with the
world. Anyone in this situation is liable to latch onto any theory
that seems to explain their suffering and give them a path to
escape. And alt-righters are even more susceptible, since it allows
them to blame the evil librulz and feminazis for their hardship.

My experience was fortunately limited, but I expect it was typical. I
went to a single workshop in the early-nineties, a time when I was
also extremely unhappy about the way things were going for me
romantically. I was, like I supect all these guys are, extremely
unsuccessful. I was concerned that my failure would continue
indefinitely, and if I didn't change things I would blow whatever
chance for happiness I had. So I was a ready mark for this grift.
Fortunately, I had a creepy sense something wasn't right, but it was
mostly dumb luck that I didn't get taken in; at the time, my
b.s.-detector was not nearly as good as it should've been in my late
twenties, and I read several books that still pollute my mind fifteen
years later.

#### SO: HERE'S YOUR REAL PROBLEM

The reason the Google HR missive created such a firestorm is not P.C. gone
amok, but instead due to a classical Computer Science problem:

    Garbage in, garbage out. 

Fortunately, the problems evolutionary psychology sets out to explain
have much simpler causes and solutions. Such simpler explainations may
even give you the help you need; these explain much of the behavior
you see socially, much better than any pseudoscientific nonsense that
are liable to offend masses of people once set to paper. Additionally,
by embracing this knowledge, you don't have to rely on neo-Nazis and
klansmen-wannabes for emotional support. You can talk to, like, normal
people.

# Let's Replace Your Dating Consultant with Some Solid Advice

Having started in college as extrordinarily unsuccessful and fighting
my way to the other side over twenty years. I am now going to recap
some things you need to know. None of it is based on evolutionary
psychology, except in a very general sense; all of them are things I
wish somebody told me. These pointers will no guarantee you success,
but they will allow you to be much happier. Think of them as "table
stakes"; they won't make winning inevitable, but at least you aren't
shut out of the game. And any decent psychologist should tell you
that's what you should focus on, since that's what you control.

So, to you guys, here is what you should know in order to be both
happy and single:

### 1. There is no "friend zone" or "nice guy" penalty. Acting like a jerk will get you nowhere.

Let's start this list by also demolishing a cherished myth of the PUA
(Pick Up Artist) scene.

Here is a simple explanation of how the world works that not only
explains how the real world works, but gives much more credit to
women. There are 4 types of guys:

1. Attractive guys who are nice guys
2. Attractive guys who are jerks
3. Less-attractive guys who are nice guys (the largest group)
4. Less-attractive guys who are jerks

Women are attracted to men in category 1 and 2.  You aren't in the friend
zone; you're in category 3.  There is no way to change it. So if you
react by becoming an assertive jerk, you don't put yourself in
category 2; you put yourself in category 4.

As John Hodgeman would say, "you're welcome."

And if you're a woman (and why on earth are you reading this?), most
category 1 men are taken, most category 2 men are not, and that's why
so many of men you find attractive and available are jerks, in spite
of the fact that most men are not jerks.

### 2. For men: your mid-twenties are going to be your WORST years dating. Steel yourself.

The following explains why so many guys - the majority in fact - feel
if they aren't tall, good-looking or ridiculously successful, the odds
are somehow stacked against them, as they spend too much time in too
many brewpubs populated by too many dateless men and too many
sausagefest music festivals and mixers.

A lot of guys leave college and take their baby-face with them to
their first job, in the city or suburb. If they move to take a job,
then they are having to rebuild their social scene. Doing so is much
more difficult than in college, where there were lots of built-in
mechanisms for meeting other people.

One problem is that techniques that used to work in college suddenly
get a lot less effective. If you're in this position, you suddenly
find out you don't have a lot of places to hang out. You probably have
no place you naturally meet people of the opposite sex. On top of
that, it seems your luck with women have changed for the worse. The
obvious cause: FEMINISM.

LOL.

No. The cause is a change in environment. One that penalizes men much
more than women.

Now, before anyone objects - women actually have a tough time
too. When you have to rebuild your entire social environment, it's a
tall order, no matter what your individual circumstances. Depending on
where you live, it could be tough to make friends. Someplace with tons
of "churn" like Austin is easy; it's harder in a settled metropolis
like Philadelphia where it seems everyon grew up there. But in any
event, it's hard. For both men and women.

However, women don't have as steep a hill to climb; in particular, if
you are an _attractive_ woman, or even merely cute, you will be
approached, given invitations, and generally find it easy to "get in
circulation." Additionally, women have something your young male peers
do not have - attention from a lot of older men. Indeed, a woman of
ages 22-35 is seen as dateable to virtually _any_ single men.

What about young men? Don't older women also like them? Well, you hear
a lot about "cougars"; but in practice, the fact that a label like
"cougar" exists means that this outside of the norm, while the word
for a man who finds younger women attractive is "man." And such
cougars tend to be, well, into looks... if you attracted attention
from older women, you'd already be attracting attention from younger
women. Which you aren't, because you're still reading this blog
post. So: older women won't help you even the odds.

The upshot is that even if you live in someplace like New York City,
which is notoriously overpopulated with single, desireable women, you
actually will have a much tougher time in your mid-twenties that young
women with a similar level of attractiveness will. So just hang
tough. When someone tells you that you should have no problems,
_ignore them_. **Your biggest problem is the idea that it should be
easy.** _It isn't going to be easy._

### 3. Physical cues matter a lot. But there's nothing you can do about them.

This is where I'm going to agree with the evolutionary psychologists.

Guys are notoriously shallow. Women are less shallow, but only by
comparison. They want tall and good-looking, hopefully without any
male pattern baldness. They are, subconsciously, looking for social
"dominance" cues or status cues, health and fitness, and "tall and
good looking" usually cover those. If you fall short in these areas, you're
out of luck. The problem is, other than general good looks and
fitness, you're mainly stuck with what you have.

A lot of self-help books and men's magazine articles will tell you
that height doesn't matter nearly so much as self-confidence. Truth
is, I have yet to hear a woman complain that her blind date was too
lacking in self-confidence, whereas the most common complaint is "he's
too short!" However, the self-help books are correct, in that you
can't focus on that, because that isn't under your control. At least
if you act confident, no one will think you're whining or feeling
sorry for yourslef. Your best bet is ignore people that tell you that
you should be having no problems or tell you to try different lines or
insipid nonsense like that. Assuming you have reasonable social
skills, it is not about technique. It is about luck. Best to
reconcile yourself to your situation instead of blaming yourself for
something not under your control.

The good news here is that if you aren't unusually short and don't
have a face like Elephant Man, then you're still in the game. Once
women are in their late twenties, they are usually are reconciled to
the fact they won't get everything they desire, looks-wise. Please
contrast that with all the guys in their thirties who still won't look
at a woman who weighs more than a hundred fifteen pounds. Even if you
feel you were dealt a bad hand, it isn't hopeless. You don't need all
the women to come around; all you need is one.

### 4. Fixing your personality will help more than anything. But don't count on it giving you the success you want now; it will later.

The reason here is twofold. First, you can't change your height, and
aside from good grooming, you're only going to improve your appearance
marginally. But you can do something about your personality. And if
you're reading alt-right forums, your personality needs plenty of
fixing.  In addition to this, working on yourself, with the help of a
psychologist, counselor, or whoever, is going to take YEARS of patient
work to bear fruit. It may well be worth it.  Are you in your
mid-twenties? Congratulations! That means by the time women are
closing in on thirty and are starting to give guys like you second
looks, you might actually have enough of a personality to be deserving
of their attention! So if you're personality isn't awesome, start now.

### 5. Toxic masculinity is toxic to both you and others. Avoid carriers.

I like using the phrase "toxic masculinity" because it ticks off
people who wonder how can you have too much manliness, but toxic is
the right word for an attitude that poisons both the carrier and those
he comes in contact with. Here's a sample of toxic beliefs about
masculine behavior, often passed down from man-to-son, or perhaps
douche-bro to douche-bro.

* You need sexual experience to become a man.

* Your worth is determined by sexual conquests. Indeed, the number of
  sexual conquests is how you tell if you're "winning" at life.

* Not only are your sexual conquests proof of your manliness,
  increasing your manliness will conversely lead to more sexual conquests.

* Easy sexual conquests will boost your self-confidence and make
  you more attractive to women.

* You will not look like a "real man" if you don't bring a girl home
  with you (preferrably a coventionally attrative one) for
  Christmas/Thanksiving/whatever.

* It's all about confidence, and if you're unsuccessful, it's because
  you're acting too much like a wimp. You have to be persistent and
  not take no for an answer so easily.

You can see why these beliefs are toxic to anyone with two 'X'
chromosomes; it leads you to view all women of childbearing age as
targets, or at best, trophies to be won and put aside afterward.

But the believers are victims too. It least you to believe nasty
things about yourself as a person, nasty things about what you have to
do succeed, and leads to a nasty self-image due to romantic failings
that may be due to things you have little control over. After all, you
have no control over your age, you have no control over your height,
you have limited control over how desireable women find you - yet the
beliefs of toxic masculinity insist that success is all just a matter of
the right attitude, agression and bullheaded persistence. Those are
fine things for winning a marathon, but you don't "win" people. The
opposite is very much the case, and holding these beliefs will make
you desparately unhappy and incline you toward thoughtless actions
that will make you even less likely to succeed in life.

So you need to ditch these. And a hint - if you hang out with a bunch
of guys who uses the term "pussy" to make fun of other guys, probably
best if you change who you hang out with.

### 6. Take all advice with a grain of salt.

You'll get a lot of hints from your friends, particularly those that
are much better off in this area. Be careful about acting
on it. Most of it is really dressed-up conventional wisdom, nonsense
gleaned from Hollywood romantic comedies and sex columns in magazines
that advertize for nightclubs. People who are already successful
generally have no idea why they are.

### 7. To engineers especially: You might not need a change in attitude. You might need a U-Haul instead.

This is a biggie. Some of the hippest, hottest places with tight job
markets are tech heavy-areas like Seattle, San Francisco, Boston and
Austin. Fun places, right? Lot's of "churn"; e.g. newcomers looking to
make friends instead of still hanging out with buddies from high
school. Easy to make friends, lots of things to do, so many bars with
fifty beers on tap to choose from. Awesome dating scene, right?

Unfortunately, places with "churn" can actually to be bad places for
guys, as they're more likely to move for professional
opportunities. Unless you live in a "glamour destination" like New
York or LA, women are probably less likely then men to relocate
there. On top of this, technology draws men far more
disproportionately. If you are an engineer and are not conventionally
attractive, think twice before settling in one of these areas if
you're concerned about your romantic prospects. If you do move there,
figure on giving yourself just one or two years, and if things are
going badly for you, MOVE. Do *not* let people tell you your
difficulties are abnormal and you need to worry more about "technique"
or "self-confidence." Your difficulties are to be expected. In some of
these places, professional men outnumber professional women by almost
3 to 2 - and the ratio of _unattached_ single men to women will be far
worse. The more attractive women will quickly pair up with only the
most attractive men, leaving the bars full of unhappy men in the midst
of 3-year-long dating dry spells. Treat your cities like you treat
your bars: if there's no women there, leave.

### 8. The "chick advice" books are correct: concentrate on growing a social life. Even though it won't immediately help your dating.

A lot of dating advice books, particularly those aimed at women, will
tell you to concentrate on "growing a life"; e.g. becoming more
fulfilled professionally and socially, and that things will otherwise
right themselves. If you're a young twentysomething woman, that is
absolutely true - and it might be all they need to do, particularly if
there are plenty of guys in the area. Attractive women can have dry
spells, but generally if they do, it's because of something unhealthy
in their life; one that is fixed, opportunities can flower.

As a man of middling looks, this may not necessarily fix things for
you, but it's the least you can do. It will make you happier and
well-adjusted, and you'll be in much better shape to take advantage
when opportunities do occur. The basement-dwelling gamergate folk and
incels are doing the opposite of what you want to do; you
need to fix yourself socially before you can expect to even begin to
succeed.

### 9. Persistence pays, but you have to persist at the right things!

Some of the most horrible advice I ever had was to be persistent. From
friends, psychologists, books, you name it. "Did a woman seem
hesitant? Hound her for her number." "Do you like her but is she
avoiding you? Maybe she's shy and playing hard to get." "How do you
know she's ignoring your advances? Try again, and be more direct." In
short, a lot of advice books for men tell you to be pushy and a bit
like a jerk. And unfortunately, even _women_ will give you advice,
even though they will complain terribly when someone does it to them.

Acting like this will backfire. It will get you the sort of
stiff-armed rejections that will send you to the basement to sulk for
for days, and probably leave the target of your advances so creeped
out that she vents to her friends about it for weeks. I've never in my
life found a woman who seemed cold to my advances who suddenly changed
one day and started flirting back with me because I wouldn't give up. It
just doesn't happen. Instead, I just acted like a jerk and felt
horrible about myself later. Life is not a rom-com or bollywood
romance, and in real life, an aggresive jerk gets attention in spite
of their attitude, not because of it.

You have to persist at other things: persist at working on yourself,
persist at meeting as many people as possible, and persist at
maintaining a good attitude instead of giving up. You have to count on
spending hours sending out hundreds of introductions on the dating
sites and not getting discouraged when they only result in two or
three in-person meetings.  Saying that "all the good ones are taken"
isn't going to help you. If you fix what you can, as I listed above,
you are going to do a lot for yourself, and the end can result in
success. It could take a few years - but that's not an eternity. And
it's much better than learned helplessness.

------------------------

And that's it. I hope I can better someone's life in some way, and
maybe, just maybe, keep some unhappy man from inflicting pain on some
unhappy woman. And maybe instead make someone else happy for change.

I can't say I had the success I wanted, but it all worked out in the
end; I'm happily married to a wonderful woman for fourteen years
now. However, I married much later in life than I wanted to, probably
because I didn't figure this out until my early thirties. If someone
had outlined this advice for me, I probably would've married earlier
and been much happier. I would've made other people happier. I
would've ticked off a lot fewer people and dumped my sense of being a
victim. Hopefully I can inspire someone to dump their unhelpful pop
psychology books in the trash and do something that makes them
happy. And as far as those of you who browse alt-right sites?  Well,
if "fat drunk and stupid is no way to go through life," think of how
much worse is it for someone to voluntarily associate themselves with
the obsolete dung-heap of the 20th century. Want to hold your head up
high with dignity, like a "real man"? Start acting on dignified
beliefs.