---
title: What Happened to Idealism
---

# What Happened to Idealism

A Baha'i oriented post. Let's set the scene with a critical quoate:

    If you should ask a thousand persons, "What are the proofs of the
    reality of Divinity?" perhaps not one would be able to answer. If
    you should ask further, "What proofs have you regarding the
    essence of God?" "How do you explain inspiration and revelation?"
    "What are the evidences of conscious intelligence beyond the
    material universe?" "Can you suggest a plan and method for the
    betterment of human moralities?" "Can you clearly define and
    differentiate the world of nature and the world of Divinity?" --
    you would receive very little real knowledge and enlightenment
    upon these questions. This is due to the fact that development of
    the ideal virtues has been neglected. People speak of Divinity,
    but the ideas and beliefs they have of Divinity are, in reality,
    superstition.  -- 'Abdu'l-Baha

I have elsewhere detailed, in a [too-long blog post](), the state of
affairs whereby twentieth and twenty-first century philosophy seems to
have abandoned many fruitful lines of inquiry and settled, instead, on
certain fixed concerns. If your concerns are set theory,
consciousness, linguistics, historicism or media theory, there is
plenty for you to work with. Other more traditional concerns like
metaphysics, teleology (human purpose) or ethics, much less so.

This is not to say that these fields have been completely ignored - if
you follow the TV show _The Good Place_, you're pelted with references
to modern ethical philosophers all the time. But there seems precious
little consensus or progress in the field. Let's face it: the modern stuff
is unbelievably obscure. If you are reading a twentieth-centry book on
ethics, it's because you took a college elective on twentieth-century
ethics. All of which is to say, ethics is invisible as far as
_popular_ philosophy. My guess is if you go to the bookstore and look
at the ethics books, you'll see books on virtue ethics, which are
little more than commentary on Aristotle; books on stoicism, whose
most important proponent was a Roman Emporer; and perhaps a book or
two misfiled from the religion section.

So what are Baha'is to do, if they wish to study the ideas of
"divinity"? How does one study it when most serious philosophers are
atheistic by creed, and functionally agnostic? Is there anything
remotely "modern"?

To this end, I'd like to introduce: *drumroll*

    The "British Idealists"

Never heard the stuff, eh? Well, it's not surprising. This philosophy
school fell out of favor a long time ago. It's high time their works
were revisited, if for no other reason than the quote from
'Abdu'l-Baha that I started with: the serious study of the "divine,"
independent of any relgious creeds.

I got interested in this subject due to my recent stuy of Josiah
Royce. He was a proponent of the even less-known school (since it
didn't exist) that one might call "American Idealism." That is, the
reason he wasn't a British Idealist was he was an honest-to-goodnes
son of California gold rush miners whose talents eventually led him to
a Harvard teaching post. I'll talk about him at length in another
post. My subject is why his writings, and those of his well-known
contemporaries like W. L. Bradley fell out of favor.

This is unfortunate. Royce and other related writers have much to say
about this "divine philosophy," all without ever straying too much
into sectarian ideology or the dogmas of their own chosen
faiths. Topics seriously studied by these philosophers are frequently
those deliberately referenced by Abdu'l-Baha - the nature of divinity,
ethics, the purpose of religious community and so forth. My opinion is
Baha'is, and anyone interested in spirituality and the function of
spiritual communities, would benefit from revisiting this
underappreciated philosophy. But unfortunately, that will take me a
while to write a decent post for that!

Instead, I'll write a post on what I found first: how this subfield
lost popularity, as it has much to do with the neglect referred to in
Abdu'l-Baha's quote.

## Why You Never Heard about Royce

First, a bit about why this field is worth revisiting. Why is it we
should study this work, if indeed it is so discredited?  When engaging
in this work, it is worth studying why it lost favor so quickly.

The conventional explanation is that in the early twentieth century,
Bertrand Russel, G. E. Moore and their contemporaries did as much as
humaly possible to bury this tradition. However, this is a simplistic
argument, as it implies that they either defeated it through airtight
arguments (good) or a steady stream of propaganda (bad). In fact,
neither are quite true; individual philosophers do not kill off entire
intellectual movements, no matter how brilliant or single-minded their aim.

If you investigate the death of British Idealism, or Idealism in
general, you'll find that there was no one argument that killed
it. The field was not so much refuted as turned aside from. Now,
someone trained in analytic philosophy may actually claim that its
claims were "disproven" by philosophers like Moore and Russel in the
early twentieth century, but there really is no such "disproof" in
existence. It is more suitable to say they were uninterested in the
idealists' objects of study. My guess is that if you ask someone who
claims to study philosophy of the analytic school (indeed, anyone with
a purely materialist or "naturalist" frame of reference) why they do
not find idealism worthy of study, they will find plenty of time to
tell you what was wrong with it: it made a host of unverifiable
claims, the logic that was used was fuzzy and imprecise, it attempted
to pass of religion as philosophy, and so on and so forth. But if you
ask this same person how much they read of this philosophy and engaged
with it, they will likely tell you that they personally didn't bother
- why, after all, would you engage with such nonsense? To them, it is
a bit like spending time studying flat-earther literature. They "know"
it is nonsense, and a semester or two spent studying this is time
taken from their life expectancy they will never get back. But aside
from assertion and attitude, they will offer no formal proof
forthcoming. Perhaps some will admit their dislike is aesthetic;
e.g. some of the "naturalist" critics following Santayana. But most people
nowadays will tall you they simply don't like anything that can't be
proven with airtight reasoning.

The problem with this line of thinking is the same problem that caused
analytic philosophy to fall out of favor in the late twentieth
century. That is: that there is no philosophy that can be proven from
the ground up. The fact that we, collectively, are unable to reconcile
the multiple, conflicting ground-up interpretations is enough to show
that. There is no single, unique, infallible "mirror of reality" that
exists objectively, an argument elaborated to great effect in Richard
Rorty's critical twentieth-century work. Instead, philosophies exist
to create and elaborate coherent world views, world views that must be
judged on something other than their coherence.

Defenders of materialist, verificationist philosophies, be they
positivist, analytic or otherwise, will usually claim that they are
doing nothing but speaking only for the facts as they see it, and that
it is the inventors of metaphyical philosophy such as the idealists
that are weaving fanciful notions. We must look at nature and nature
alone, and if that means drawing certain conclusions about what it is
to live a moral life - if, indeed, such a thing exists, so be it.

I do not believe the detractors of idealism did this in service to an
agenda - as an aside, I suspect one reason academic philosophers hold
Ayn Rand in such low regard is her willingness to user her philosophy
in service of just such an agenda. Philosophers generally have a
heartfelt feeling they are doing nothing but serve the truth. But all
coherent philosophies align with a particular world view, and as such,
those who benefit from that world view supported by a given philosophy
are served by its propagation. This may not be all bad; in the case of
the enlightenment philosophies of the seventeent century, almost will
agree these were positive ideals that left humanity far better
offf. However, the effect of a philosophy on the world may just as
easily be negative.

	There has not been a society in the history of the world, no
	matter how pragmatic, experimentalist and multi-form it may
	have been, that did not derive its thrust from some
	foundational interpretation of reality. Such a system of
	thought reigns today virtually unchallenged across the planet,
	under the nominal designation "Western
	civilization". Philosophically and politically, it presents
	itself as a kind of liberal relativism; economically and
	socially, as capitalism—two value systems that have now so
	adjusted to each other and become so mutually reinforcing as
	to constitute virtually a single, comprehensive
	world-view. Appreciation of the benefits—in terms of the
	personal freedom, social prosperity and scientific progress
	enjoyed by a significant minority of the Earth's people—cannot
	withhold a thinking person from recognizing that the system is
	morally and intellectually bankrupt. It has contributed its
	best to the advancement of civilization, as did all its
	predecessors, and, like them, is impotent to deal with the
	needs of a world never imagined by the eighteenth century
	prophets who conceived most of its component elements. 

	The Universal House of Justice. Century of Light (Kindle
	Locations 2055-2063). Bahá’í eBooks Publications.  

Far from having no agenda, materialist (or "neutral monist," if you're
being picky) philosophies support agendas just as much as any other
philosophy. While its inventors may have not wished to spread such an
agenda, it spread nonetheless, due to reasons having nothing to do
with philosophy. The death of idealism and the rise of analytic
philosopy was not because idealism was "disproven," but due to three
unrelated, critical factors - one of intellectual fashion, one
political, and one of popular appeal.

_Intellectual "fashion"_: By the early twentieth century, it was
obvious that the field of science was steadly progressing in a manner
that left its former handmaiden philosophy far behind. Many felt the
only way for philosophy to progress in the same manner was to adopt
the same amount of rigor in its logic. The analytic philosophers took
this to its logical conclusion - everything that could be proven must
be proven, and everything that could not be proven was not a suitable
topic for discussion by philosophers. In practice, this also meant a
full-hearted embrace of materialism as the basis for its
metaphysics. The material world was subject to the verifiable,
quantifiable laws of nature, unlike idealist concepts like The Ideal
and Absolute, hard-to-grasp abstractions tossed about as if they were
real things in the frequent caricatures of idealist philosophy.

Analytic philosophy also had nicely positioned itself as an extention
to the positivist philosophy of the late nineteenth century. This was
a very well-developed philosophy, particularly in the UK and France,
and these philosophers were all very much materialists. In the late
nineteenth century, your average lay person was not a materialist, but
increasing numbers of scientists were, and they held great
intellectual sway. Every scientific discovery was seen as "proof" that
mechanical Newtonian physics could explain everything. In contrast to
this, idealistic philosophy seemed irresolutely immaterial and
abstract.

_Political_: Idealism was mainly thought of as a German project,
particularly associated with Hegel. British (and American) idealism
was seen an extension of that. Indeed, Royce was often tagged as "the
American Hegel." However, there was a significant problem with
anything seen as German in the early 20th century: World War I. To
British eyes in particular, the cause of this disastrous war primarily
lay in nationalist ideologies and the Prussian militarism whose
adventurism led to a brutal invasion of Belgium and France on the
flimsiest of pretenses. It was felt that philosophically, this
nationalism and militarism traced back somehow to certain strains of
Hegel's writings themselves. Analytic philosophy, besides being a
perfect foil for Hegelianism, was eager to show itself as ideally
"British"; the latest incarnation of a line of skeptical,
non-nonsense, verificationist philosophies embodied by a tradition of
British emperical and positivist thinkers - particularly the skeptical
Hume.

A similar process happened in continental Europe via the Vienna
Circle, as a different set of of emperical thinkers took their cues
from the writings of Wittgenstein. Their creed was to study only what
can be known and proven. Over time, many particular associates of the
Vienna circle came to be known as vigorous defenders of free markets,
e.g. Hayek, and this movement began to serve a different master, as an
anti-Communist element within the group argued for raising the right
for unfettered markets to the same level a other more basic rights
propounded in the enlightenment such as freedom of speech. As such,
these philosophies found a powerful base of support within powerful
commercial interests, as analytic and verificationists philosophies
frequently found themselves leveraged in defense of the free market (a
bit ironic, given Bertrand Russel's later political leanings).

_Popular Appeal_: Finally, there was also the case that idealism had
little popular appeal, outside of the academy. Much idealistic
philosophy is hard to read and tedious. Hardcore analytic philosophy
is no picnic, of course; one does not "read" an analytic paper, any
more than one would "read" an applied mathematics journal or a
graduate school math text. But at least it is precise, and analytic
philosophers like Bertrand Russel could also write in clear and
convincing language to laypersons who would be absolutely confounded
by the mathematical basis for their philosophy. Writers like Hegel, on
the other hand, were quite hard to read, and terms were generally not
defined as well by their writers as they should have been, resulting
in multiple interpretations by readers of the same idea - something
that should hardly be the result of philosophical study! Contrast this
with perhaps the most popular anti-idealist critic: Nietchze. Much of
his popularity is due to his readability. Can one pick apart his
arguments? Certainly. But one can certainly understand them easily, in
one sitting, which is much more than you can say of many
philosophers. And someone who is philosophically naive is likely to be
swayed by such argumentation.

Finally, many idealists identified themselves as theistic, which made
them something of a target as atheism became to be identified with
modern, scientific outlooks. This particular fashion remains very much
current. Now, one would think that this would have given the movement
a level of popular support, since the mass of the English-speaking
world were themselves believers, right? This was not actually the
case. During the time of its writing, idealism's greatest fans were
theologians of the sort of far-left, universalist variety, embodied in
log-deceased publications like _The American Century_; theologians
that had (and still have) only a handful of fans in religious
congregations. Far from being admired by preachers and the mass of
congregants, their ideas were frequently held at a distance, being
that they embraced the moralism and social responsibility implied by
religion, while disclaiming the feeling of in-group superiority that
is, truth be told, what draw many congregants to their creed. Foes of
religion, meanwhile, would rather target religion by defining it in
the terms demanded by its most dogmatic, superstitious practitioners,
all the better to kill it off. Best if you can just wish away the
pointy-headed idealists.

The result of the combination of these three factors conspired to kill off
interest in idealism. Idealism was not so much defeated, as that it
had felt it has run its course. By the twentieth century, those who
defended idealism were generally put in the difficult position of
having to defend the necessity of any ideas resulting from their
inquiry. It is hard to tell if the analytic philosophers were
objecting to the the metaphysical underpinnings of idealism, or were
objecting to its field of study and concerns. But the end result was
the same - a long period of neglect of idealistic philosophers through
the twentieth century.




