---
title: Theism: A Lecture for Junior Youth
---

# Theism: A Lecture for Junior Youth (or: What's this God thing anyway)
This is not a regular blog post. Instead, this is targeted at young
adolescents, rather than anyone who might stumble accross this post. And any young adolescent that you might know.

So here's why I wrote this post for teens (and precocious tweens). The
problem some reigious teachers and youth organizers have with
teaching this group is they start thinking skeptical, logical
thoughts, and they ask bothersome questions like "How do we know there
is a God" and "What's wrong if I don't believe in God but I'm still
agood person."  Many youth coordinators, not being philosophically
inclined themselves, will not know how to answer this; or, they will
give a deep personal story and testimony which answers the issue for
themselves, but will be seen as a dodge by skeptical listeners. I
can't confess to being any better myself; if pressed for an answer,
I'd probably burden the listener with some ridiculously hard=to-follow
argument from idealists and neo-Aristotaliens which is liable to
baffle them. And that's the BEST case. In the worst case, my poor
suffering listeners will nod their head in agreement but continues to
silently nurse their doubts over the course of years, masking their
ever growing unbelieve with a passive, cheerful disengagement of the
subject. The minute they step onto a college campus, they drop any
interest in religion thoughts outright.

And of course, they do have a valid question: "What's wrong if I don't
believe in God but I'm still a good person?" After all, this is their
own personal belief; you as a parent should be far more concerned
about their behavior and their virtuous conduct than personal beliefs
that are really their own business and only their business once they
are past their mid-teens. It's one thing to force your eight-year old
to sit through religious education and learn fables about how it's not
nice to be a sociopath; you would be a poor parent if you did not do
so! It's quite different if you act like your seventeen year old child
is terribly flawed because his or her private beliefs aren't
completely in line with your chosen creed, even though she or he is a
well-adjusted honors student who does service projects just because he
or she *wants to*.

So regarding such skeptical questions, the only respectful, suitable response
is a real answer. An ideal answer is one that shows you have given it
some thought, is not a circular explanation, is in conformance with
your chosen religion (Baha'i in my case) and explains why theistic
beliefs are more conducive to moral conduct than unbelief or apathy.

So here's my stab at it.

---------------------------

How do we know something is? For instance, this God thing people keep
people referring to... how do we know it exists? We can't see it or
sense it; science tells us there's no way to test for such a
thing. And even if it does exist, it's hard to tell how it makes a
difference. Is there a reasonable way to tell? Philosophers may be
able to make a case for God. I've even seen logical "proofs" God
exists. But how do we validate this, since there seems no way to test
such proofs?

Well, there are other things we have theoretically proved, but still
can't see. Having done so, we can "see" things that science tells us
cannot be seen. The way we do it is by looking for _signs_.

Do I have an example? Of course I do, or I wouldn't have brought up
the subject. Think of a black hole. You've heard of it before. A point
in space with the mass of hundreds or thousands of suns, a point where
gravity is so strong that nothing that passes within a certain
distance of it (the "event horizon") can ever get out again, not even
light.

Can we see a black hole? The answer is, no, duh, it's a black
hole. You can't see a black hole. By definition, it's completely
dark. But we've known such things have actually been in existence for
a few decades after its theoretical prediction. This in spite of the
fact that you can't see it, and you can't just walk up and throw a
hammer into it and make sure it doesn't come back out. How did we
verify such things? By looking for the _signs_ of a black
hole. Evidence that cannot be explained except for the existence of
such entities.

So what are those signs? In the case of black holes, we know that if
they exist, they're going to affect their "neighborhood" in space in
very particular ways. You'll see the movements of bodies affected by
something that isn't there. You'll see strong gravitational lensing
(the bending of light by gravity) in the immediate area.  And you'll
see x-ray radiation from something that doesn't betray visible
light. And in fact, the much lauded "picture" of the black hole from
this year (2019) is a computer-generated composite based on these
signs. In other words, we have so many signs that a black hole is
there that we can put together an exact picture based on those without
ever "seeing" it.

So can we do anything similar with God? Well, the Baha'i writings
refer to certain things as the "signs of God." And what are these
signs? Well, they aren't necessarily what you would look for.

A brief aside: in this argument I'm going to be quoting various
religious teachers, mostly from the Baha'i Faith.  Now this is
supposed to be an argument from logic, not religion. So why am I
quoting religious figures here? It's to show the source of these
ideas, that's all. Many of these ideas are common among all religions,
and indeed theists of all stripes, even if they don't call themselves
religous. In addition, the last step of the proof relies on beliefs
that are somewhat distinctive to the Baha'i writings, so I need to
quote from those.

So let's start with these "signs of God," things that are too
difficult to explain without posing the existence of something
undetectable that has nevertheless left its imprint on the
universe. These are things that are not inexplicable by physical
processes, so their existence indicates the presence of deity as a
likely cause. Let's go through things that have been proposed as signs
of God, and figure out whether each candidate can or cannotnot be
explained by material mechanisms. Many things religous people feel are
signs of God are not definitive enough.

The most obvious one is the wonders of nature.

    Nature in its essence is the embodiment of My Name, the Maker, the
    Creator. Its manifestations are diversified by varying causes, and
    in this diversity there are signs for men of discernment. Nature
    is God's Will and is its expression in and through the contingent
    world

	(Baha'u'llah, Tablets of Baha'u'llah, p. 142)

For some who believe in God, the wonders of the natural world are
sufficient signs. Indeed, there is an entire field of study (or
pseudoscience, if you do not agree) called creationism. The idea is
that creation is itself so marvelous and beautiful, that this beauty
is and of itself proof of a design. It is not necessary to believe
that God sat down and designed everything in great detail and set
loose his fine-tuned creation 6000 years ago, right down to fossils
with carbon dating from millions of years ago that were placed by God
to tempt people into unbelief of Him. Few theists follow that actual
belief, thogh many atheists act as if that were the case. Many
religious people explain God as Creater by giving him cr the
original mover and designer of the great natural laws of the
universe. To them, the perfection of this whole system is in itself as
convincing a sign of any of God's existence. Such a proof would allow
for the creation of the entire universe from a singularity 14.5
billion years ago resulting in self-awareness and intelligence on at
least one planet, and presumably many others.

But of course, the easy rejoinder to this is that this is an
_anthropomorphic_ answer. For all we know, there are billions of other
universes; we would of course only be around to ask these questions on
the one universe that would produce us. Likewise, we find the natural
world beautiful because our animal nature is in accord with it. And we
find our own constructions beautiful because our brains designed it,
and we aim to produce designs that delight those.

So we must move on from that sign; it is too easily explained by the
natural world, much as it may move us to transcendence. This is more
than enough proof for the believer, but not so much the skeptic, who
may simply not have the sort of psychological character to be moved to
belief by this.

What about miracles? Those from occidental traditions (e.g. Christian,
Jewish, Islam) frequently refer to the miracles of the great religious
teachers as the "signs"; in the Christian Bible, such miracles are
intended to not only to be signs of God, but of Jesus' mission as well.

But here again, their are problems. The most obvious one is that there
is no replication of such signs. Such signs are proof to the viewers
on hand only. Indeed, Jesus withheld such signs from those he felt not
worthy:

    And the Pharisees came forth, and began to question with him
    [Jesus], seeking of him a sign from heaven, tempting him. And he
    sighed deeply in his spirit, and saith, "Why doth this generation
    seek after a sign? Verily I say unto you, there shall no sign be
    given unto this generation."

	(King James Bible, Mark 8:11-12)

The Baha'i writings actually downplay outright miracles as unreliable
testimony.

    For if we consider miracles a great proof, they are still only
    proofs and arguments for those who are present when they are
    performed, and not for those who are absent.

    For example, if we relate to a seeker, a stranger to Moses and
    Christ, marvelous signs, he will deny them and will say:
    "Wonderful signs are also continually related of false gods by the
    testimony of many people, and they are affirmed in the Books. The
    Brahmans have written a book about wonderful prodigies from
    Brahma." He will also say: "How can we know that the Jews and the
    Christians speak the truth, and that the Brahmans tell a
    lie? For both are generally admitted traditions, which are
    collected in books, and may be supposed to be true or false."

	(Abdu'l-Baha, Some Answered Questions, p. 100)

So we must move on from that. Perhaps the more convincing signs are
not in the natural world itself. Let us instead look at the human
experience and the experience of human societies. Even if one doubts
the great founders of the faith, there is one sign that is held by all
to be wonderous: virtue and our rational faculty. To religious
believers, these too are signs of God.

Let's start with our "rational faculty":

    Verily I say, the human soul is, in its essence, one of the signs
    of God, a mystery among His mysteries.

	(Baha'u'llah, Gleanings from the Writings of Baha'u'llah, p. 160)

Elsewhere speaking of our mental facilities, consciousness and
thought, Baha'i writings state:

    This same relationship bindeth this faculty with whatsoever hath
    been the recipient of these names and attributes within the human
    temple. These diverse names and revealed attributes have been
    generated through the agency of this sign of God.

	(Baha'u'llah, Gleanings from the Writings of Baha'u'llah, p. 163)

Likewise, _virtue_ and virtuous conduct are frequently likened to
signs of God:

    Strive that ye may be enabled to manifest to the peoples of the
    earth the signs of God, and to mirror forth His commandments. Let
    your acts be a guide unto all mankind, for the professions of most
    men, be they high or low, differ from their conduct. It is through
    your deeds that ye can distinguish yourselves from others.

	(Baha'u'llah, Gleanings from the Writings of Baha'u'llah, p. 305)

And so, the human mind mind and our ability to act virtuously, with
love, charity, compassion and unselfishly are themselves signs of God,
things that are difficult to explain when compared to the world of
nature.

Here again, materialists would object that such signs are
unconvincing; a natural outcome of our physical composition and our
evolutionary path from a social pack anima. But their claim is not as
unarguable as they were with the first signs I proposed.

Materialists would start by attacking the claim that the rational
faculty is somehow tied to any notion of "soul," or otherwise
mysterious; instead, they would claim the human mind is instead merely
material in nature and is simply a "meat machine" that calculates
things. This leads to the question of consciousness itself, and how it
is created by by such a machine. A number of researchers in cognitive
science have convinced themselves and others that consciousness is a
mere figment of our own brain processes. In other words, these
scientists claim there isn't actually a consciousness; it's just a
trick the the brain plays on us.

But this question is far from settled. We have had over sixty years of
serious work exploring artificial intelligence, and during this time, a
"thinking machine" has always seemed to require another ten years of
research to bear fruition. Recent revolutionary advances in artificial
intelligence are due to advances in machine learning, which upon
inspection are simply complicated mechanisms for solving optimizations
and have brough us no closer to a thinking machine, let alone a
conscious one. As of now, there is not even a working theory as to
bring consciousness to a computer. What cognitive scientists have
offed as proof is instead something one critic called "promissary
materialism"; the assertion that since science has solved tough
problems before, and this is just one more tough problem, it will
eventually be solved. Unfortunately, given present trends in
research, this requires a faith in scientific and technical progress
that rivals the faith of religious people in their own God.

The second claim, that virtues are in no way a sign of God, rests on
the claim that there is nothing particularly unnatrual about virtuous
conduct. Instead, it is believed that virtuous conduct is adequately
explained by evolutionary pressures. But here again, it's a bit hard
to see how evolutionary pressures are responsible for all of these
virtues. You can back out some virtues as being evolutionary
adaptations of social animals - loyalty, honor (which is really
mantenance of status within the tribal group), courage, friendliness.
Think of this as the "alpha male" set of virtues, those necessary to
grow a tribe and maintain order within a tribe. And there are others
like care or compassion which make sense for one's immediate family,
as adaptations to favor a particular genetic profile, or perhaps for
the tribe in a limited fashion. But there are others virtues which are
difficult to explain as adaptations; altruistic virtues are adaptive
only in the sense that there are others to see this behavior. Yet
people exhibit these altruistic virtues all the time, even when there
is no one to view such behavior.

So regarding these two signs: what we have here is a draw. It isn't
obvious either is explained by totally materialist mechanics. To
atheists, belief in some spiritual nature in our creation and virtue
as a "sign of God" violates Ockham's law - it poses an unnecessary
entity for which there is an insufficient warrent for belief. But the
materialist claim that consciousness "just happens" as soon as you
design a complicated enough feedback system according to a design that
has somehow spontaneously evolved in spite of its unlikelyness due to
the billions of years of evolution is no less of a leap of faith. And
the fact that virtuous conduct in many cases gives no benefit to
reproductive fitness of oneself or even the tribe seems to conflict
with basic evolutionary principles. Furthermore, many people who are
atheistic still feel themselves to be _moral realists_; that is, they
believe there is such a thing as absolute ethical rights and
wrongs. Unfortunately, the proofs of what are right and wrong do not
lie within the world of nature. Humans can be good or bad naturally,
but there is no reason to expect selflessness should be some sort of
norm when the world of nature gives no such reward for this
behavior. If you are a moral realist and an atheist, then perhaps you
don't believe in a God, but you obviously believe *something* out
there that isn't on the material plane. So let's call this a wash.

At this point, I'd like to introduce what I feel is the most
convincing sign. This is where religion enters into the discussion.

If you are a Baha'i, or perhaps were simply driven by your parents to
Baha'i classes, you probably are aware of one very specific "sign of
God": the founders of the great religions. Indeed, if you
research the Baha'i writings, Baha'u'llah frequently uses the phrase
"signs of God" as a synonym for these great men:

    The signs of God shine as manifest and resplendent as the sun
    amidst the works of His creatures. Whatsoever proceedeth from Him
    is apart, and will always remain distinguished, from the
    inventions of men. From the Source of His knowledge countless
    Luminaries of learning and wisdom have risen, and out of the
    Paradise of His Pen the breath of the All-Merciful hath
    continually been wafted to the hearts and souls of men. Happy are
    they that have recognized this truth.

	(Baha'u'llah, Gleanings from the Writings of Baha'u'llah, p. 144)

    He [the "true seeker"] will, likewise, clearly distinguish all the
    signs of God -- His wondrous utterances, His great works, and
    mighty deeds -- from the doings, the words and ways of men, even
    as the jeweler who knoweth the gem from the stone, or the man who
    distinguisheth the spring from autumn, and heat from cold.

	(Baha'u'llah, Gleanings from the Writings of Baha'u'llah, p. 268)

The Baha'i writings are consistent here - the ultimate sign of God is
the periodic, unbroken procession of his manifestations throughout the
ages. Indeed, Baha'i teachings tell us that this is the _only_ way to
truly know of God. The presence of a Jesus, Buddha or Muhommad,
someone who can reform an entire culture using only the force of word
and example, is one of the most singular elements in human
history. Going back a bit further, the "axial age," an era posed by
Karl Jaspers nearly three thousand years ago which coincided with the
Jewish prophets, the start of Greek philosopy, and Taoism and Buddhism
in the orient, caused a revolution in ethics and values that are hard
to explain through simple cultural or evolutionary mechanics in
iron-era civilizations, which is really the only thing an atheist or
materialist could appeal to. A more doctrinaire Baha'i than myself
would point at this process of spiritual evolution as itself being all
the proof anyone fair-minded would need.

The most common rejoinder to such a claim nowadays is to simply trash
anything religious, and claim whatever salutory message the religious
teachers brought were nullified by the mere fact teachers were
religious. But there is a problem here. If you read the religious
writings, there are certain virtues that are uniquely religious _that
do not seem to be from the natural world_. Atheists may claim that the
teaching of Jesus Christ are nothing but common sense and common
ethics codified, but it's hard to find a similarly secular teacher
from the same era preaching the same message. Let's talk about some of
these virtues:

* Care for strangers
* Care for refugees
* Charity for the poor
* Need for equity in leadership
* Need for justice in dealings with one another
* Need for forgiveness
* Care for the sick

These are acknowledged to be underpinnings of civilization. But none
of them would have been needed, or would've even been conceivable,
within the context of the tribal society. And let's remember, humanity
has been a tribal society for over ninety-nine percent of its entire
existence. If you look at the world of ancient mythology, or even in the
Jewish mythology laid down in Genesis, one sees very little of these
virtues in action. This is to be expected; these are very ancient
stories fleshed out when the first permanent settlements came into
being. Yet in spite of their lack, these virtues are acknowledged as
necessary for civilization, even by those who have no mechanism to
explain their initial teachings and acceptance.

Indeed, the very foundation of englightenment philosopies, those that
give us such concepts as democracy, equality before the law, and
guarantees of liberty, rests upon the notion of equality in the sight
of God. Up until the enlightment, secular philosophies still defended
a hierarchical power structure, one which had no problem asserting the
rights of kings and nobility over the uncultured masses. Atheists who
claim that egalitarianism is somehow innate in their philosophy
overlook the fact that many of the great ancient civilizations were
secular in nature (at least for the leadership class), yet somehow
egalitarianism was never proclaimed, even by those that
would've had the wherewithal to do so. Atheists claim that a moral,
just, democratic society can be build without religion. And they may
be right. But it is very difficult to see how one could have such a
moral society without acceptance of certain virtues and concepts drawn
straight from religious traditions which otherwise have no serious
precedent. It is hard to find these teachings in ancient traditions of
secular societies, most of which built their moral code upon
obedience, order, loyalty to the group and hierarchy. These are all
easy to explain as outgrowth of moralities from "tribal" ethics; the
religious ethics above are not.

So to restate my claim: I've noted a large number of the signs of
God. Many of these claims can be explained away by materialists as
happy coincidences, accidents, or by sociological mechanisms yet
undiscovered. Yet eventually, by presuming so many happy accidents and
coincidences, *there comes a point where it is simpler to admit of a
universe that allows for a God then to try to device a system
explaining all of this which excludes God outright.* If not God, than
some equivalent spiritual concept that explains such things. To do
otherwise means making the universe less comprehensible than it has
been up until this point.

So is the God of this proof testable? Well unlike many claimed proofs
of God, this one is testable, if only in theory. The tiest is: if over
the timespan of eaons, if these "messengers" continue to come, if
these messages continue to advance humanity, and if people continue to
be moved by these messages to reform their societies and advance
forward, then this will be a pattern too strong to be denied as
coincidence, and one will has sufficient warrant for presuming a
causal entity as "proven."

Or, the materialists could be right, and it could be just a
coincidence. But unfortunately, I cannot wait for just such a proof. I
have to live my life now, not at a time when such a pattern (or lack
thereof) will become as obvious as the noonday sun. Because my choice
determines whatever beliefs *I act on now*. The beliefs one acts on
determine what one really believe; one's beliefs are not simply one's
inmost thoughts that one has when he or she imagines arguing with
"that guy on the internet who is always wrong." My belief is in a God,
not because the proof is incontrovertible, but I believe that the
signs of God are so important, and showing them in my behavior is so
important, that I must act as if I believe, even if I can't see or
feel some fuzzy deity I may or may not be praying to properly. Because
I believe, I feel compelled to acknowledge a real moral right and
wrong, and act as if my purpose is fulfilled by producing such actions
as to show the signs of God in myself.

----------------------

Unfortunately that's only part of the answer. What, then of the
challenge "Why can't I be a good person and still not believe in God?"
The short answer is, if you are what you think of as "a good person,"
you are showing the signs of God in your actions, and this betrays
some idealistic streak that is not explained by any atheistic
philosophy.* You may claim to be unmoved by God or any sort of
immmaterial spirit, but your actions say otherwise. You may claim to
blaspheme "the Son," yet your belief does not blaspheme "The Holy
Spirit"; it upholds it.  A fuller answer to this is a bit complicated,
but there is one. I'll follow up in a subsequent post.
