---
title: Why Tech Firms Keep "Snubbing" Your Livable Mid-Sized City
---

# Why Tech Firms Keep "Snubbing" Your Livable Mid-Sized City
This post is semiprofessional in nature, aimed at those starting or
thinking of starting a career in technology. I'm basically trying to
phrase productivly what would otherwise be an emotional, self-centered
venting aimed at those who keep wondering what's wrong with those tech
firms who won't locate in their nice, livable, middle-American
city. It is still unsolicited in nature.

To explain this, I need to make a long-ish introduction.
I don't like to phrase anything that could be seen as political, but
sometimes truths are expressed by people who are either seen as
politicians or must act in the capacity as politicians. This is true,
no matter whether the politician styles themselves as a "business
executive" or "community organizer." And I do not mind saying so when
I believe the politicians do the right thing. So: one thing our prior
mayor of New York City did that I appreciate was articulate just what
New York City was good for. It is this: a luxury good. If you have a
business, and you need a lot of very educated people, and access to a
lot of money, and you need a lot of infrastructure support, and you
are willing to pay through the nose through taxes and overhead costs
to give your business all of those things: then, it makes sense to
site your business in New York City. Said mayor, understanding this,
then went out and targeted all sorts of businesses that fit this
profile - not just high finance.

Now, whether you as a citizen, like this person, take the step of
doing the same and supporting those businesses through government
actions: that's a matter of opinion and philosophy. But at the very
least, to understand why businesses stay or expand in your city, you
should figure what it's good for. Doing this will put you several
steps ahead of any other citizen that cares about their own city. I
think one reason we have a burgeoning tech sector and biomedical
sector in New York is because fifteen years ago, this mayor recognized
that having just finance firms fill this role put New York in a very
vulnerable position. The city would have been much worse off during
the great recession had the Mayor's office not recognized this fact
and worked to address it by targeting economic sectors with same
cost-insensitive, talent-intensive requirements. And this is the
profile of firms that choose to locate here: cost-insensitive,
talent-intensive. Obviously it is not this way for every firm. Nobody
said it was. But better to be good at one thing than nothing at all,
and if the one thing you're good at pays very well, so much the
better.

Not all tech firms are going to be like this, but they are, on
balance, going to be a little less cost-sensitive, and a little more
talent-intensive than your average firm. It is clear that the general
public and certain talking heads who enjoy pandering to them don't
understand these fact. Instead, if you pick up a magazine like Forbes,
every few months you'll see a variant of an thinly-veiled editorial
article that they've run in near-identical form since the
mid-sixties. This "evergreen" article will decry New York's high taxes
and high regulation and predict a flood of business exits, promising
an apocolyptic gotterdamerung to uppity unrepentetant New Yorkers. No
matter what the situation, the article is framed the same. Liberal
gets elected?  "This may be the straw that broke the camel's back, New
York business are starting to seek greener pastures. *<Insert anecdote
about a small firm leaving New York>*."  Business-oriented politican
get elected?  "New York city is recognizing it has problems, but it
may be too little, too late. *<Insert anecdote about another small
business weighing a relocation>.*" No one ever seems to wonder just
why it is that New York hasn't collapsed Detroit-style, the way it
surely should have already given these prognostications. The key fact
they've overlooked is simple: given these firms' needs for large pool
of talent within commuting distance, access to capital and always-on
infrastructure and transportation, these considerations absolutely
dwarf considerations like taxes and regulations. Instead, those are
simply seen as unavoidable costs of doing business, some of which are
even seen as *gasp* desireable by the people running these
companies. These are far different considerations than someone running
their own machine tooling shop or plumbing supply business.

Likewise, if one is planning one's career and where to locate it, one
is making a perhaps simpler tradeoff of cost-of-living versus
opportunity and salary. I would certainly have a bigger house, and
probably a bit more spare time, if I lived in my home city of
Louisville. I would also have very few firms I could work for that
could justify paying the sorts of salary that my resume would justify,
putting me at risk for painful relocation every time there was a
business downturn. So for me it is a tradeoff; I've decided an
inflated salary, access to a large employer pool and large
professional network is worth living in an eighteen-hundreed square
foot house in spite of having the sort of income that would purchase a
thirty-five hundred square foot house anywhere else in the country.

Note that in all of the above cases, people are making tradeoffs and
weighing them. These are rational decisions, made by rational people.
Businesses choose to site and expand here - businesses that
pay a lot of money to their employees by the way - and they have
rational reasons for doing so. So do the professionals that locate here.

Yet if you read the popular and business press, you would think these
rational reasons don't exist at all. Instead, technology firms are
frequently described as "looking down their nose" at middle
America. Witness the hand-wringing when Amazon, in what surely would
have been a foregone conclusion to neutral observers, decided to put
HQ2 in northern Virginia and Long Island City (the area of Queens just
across the bridge from midtown Manhattan). The talking heads were
shocked, shocked, that once again, a firm requiring vast access to a
large educated labor pool sited in a large city instead of granting
their largesse to a grateful "business-friendly" city willing to
prostrate their government to their service. Never mind the fact that
given Amazon's requirements, only about five such cities in the US
could realistically be considered; many willfully cast a purely
business decision as motivated by pure snobbery. (Addendum: for all
the glorification that occurred when Amazon suddenly, loudly walked
away from their relocation deal, Amazon has not decided to bestow
their largess on the middle American cities desparate for their
affections. Judging from the fact I still get intensive interest from
their engineering recruiters, it seems evident they will simply scale
up their existing operations in New York in a more low-key manner.)

And what about the people who willingly relocate to take jobs in these
areas, i.e. me? They are posed as elitests or opportunists who are
simply "self sorting" and isolating themselves from "the real
america"; people who are so snobby they would rather pay too much for
a house rather than take a job "where they belong." These discussions
are usually abetted by critical essayists loudly wondering if locating
one's career in a coastal city is some sort of disloyal abandonment -
as if these mid-sized cities would be so much better off if they had
lots of chip-designers, medical researchers and artificial
intelligence programmers turn their back on their hifalutin' technical
training and staying put to take jobs in local manufacturing firms and
back-office insurance operations.

Let's be clear - technology firms can and do locate in mid-sized
cities. But they don't just do this randomly, or to somehow bestow
their approval on the obviously-superior cultural and political
beliefs of the locals. Instead, they locate in cities that decided to
take strategic measures to draw such firms. Austin and Raleigh-Durham
are the most high-profile examples, but many other mid-sized cities
have taken steps to ensure that they have a base of technology
jobs. However, these require some pretty hard tradeoffs. People like
Richard Florida have theorized that a lot of this is cultural in
nature, and there may be something to that. But I don't think either
company founders or professionals care that much about culture, to be
honest. My guess is the reasons are simpler.  You need very
well-funded lower and upper education systems. You need a well-run
government that is willing to enforce regulations on the books, to
ensure firms are not undercut by scofflaws willing to bend the law and
ensure your employees enjoy a good quality of life - remember, many of
their most critical employees will be relocatees.  And you need
_taxes_ to support all of this (yes, those). Indeed, while you may
occasionally find these cities in states known for anti-government,
anti-tax attitudes, the cities themselves frequently do not fit this
description.

And one side note: as far as the claim by some that only "college towns" can
pull this off, there is literally no decent-sized city that doesn't
have at least one sizeable university full of pointy-headed
intellectuals that could serve as a basis for growth. But it has to be
adequately funded, and government and business leaders has to leverage
the college, instead of regarding its residents as an alien occupying
force and comfortably settling into a parochial "town and gown"
mindset.

Unfortunately, this seems to be unpopular, expensive medicine. Far
easier to follow the advice in Forbes and Inc. magazine and Fox
Business that say all you have to do are lower your taxes and
regulation and businesses will flood the Mayor's office wanting to
relocate and bring jobs, jobs, jobs. If that fits your preconceived
notions as a politician or local industry leader, so much the
better. But the problem with believing these articles is that they are
not serious recommendations; they are disguised political editorials
and their reasoning is built on ~~lies~~ common misunderstandings of
economics. There is not a well run technology company in the nation
for whom taxes and regulation are anything more than a cost of doing
business, to be dealt with by accountants and HR staff. If you want
your community to grow, you will have to find out what makes business
grow, what makes workers happy, and work towards improving those
things. And stop cutting expenditures in lower and higher education;
businesses don't like having to fight like weasels with other firms
over recruiting from a tiny pool of educated workers, or luring people
to relocate with expensive spending packages. And employees don't like
having to spend five figures per child to send their kids to private
school because the public schools are underfunded and school board is
anti-intellectual. You have to invest and find out what works.  That
takes work. And, maybe, spending some money. Maybe.
