---
title: How *Not* to Destroy Genetic Diversity
---

## How *Not* to Destroy Genetic Diversity (or: Give It Up for "Jungle Fever")

I'll keep this short, because I'm hoping if I limiting the length, it
will limit the opportunities I have for accidentally slandering the
sort of people I'd like to reach. So here it is:

INTERRACIAL MARRIAGE DOES NOT DESTROY GENETIC DIVERSITY

That's the tl;dr.

For the rest of you... you're thinking "that's an odd way to start,
who even said that?" Well... here's the deal. Nobody with half a brain
is really much buying this white supremacy stuff nowdays. But there
are still people who would really benefit if it took off again! So
people keep coming up with different angles to try to pass it off on
unhappy people, be they basement-dwelling internet trolls, gamers or
both. So now we have "the great replacement" theory, this idea that a
shadowy cabal is using interracial marriage to fill the world with
brown-skinned people, and this other idea of "genetic pluralism" where
people on the internets say that it's important various ethnic groups
not intermarry so they can keep existing ethnic groups well-defined
because it's important for the diversity of humankind. If you don't
really understand genetics, you might actually buy the genetic
pluralism arguments, thinking the loss of easily identifiable groups
mean the loss of genetic diversity. But again,

INTERRACIAL MARRIAGE DOES NOT DESTROY GENETIC DIVERSITY

If you pick up a brand new Rubik's cube and whirl it around randomly,
did you just destory all the colors? No, you just mixed it up. And
frankly, that's the state it belongs in anyway (did you every try to
sort it back the way it came? Totally not worth the effort.)

Oh but that analogy doesn't work for you. Perhaps this will reach you.

If you shake up a snow globe real hard, does the WHITE stuff all
disappear? No, it's still there, there's just as much WHITE stuff as
there was before, it's just floating all around. See, you don't lose
any WHITEness at all, now do you?

You don't "lose" recessive genes by mixing them up; they're still in
the gene pool. You can lose genetic diversity with [stuff like
this](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-12-07/dingle-the-reality-of-sperm-donors-is-hitting-home/7006906)),
but that's hardly normal. No, what you are going to lose are lots of
people who hold racial purity as some ridiculous point of pride. You
are going to lose people who hold to white supremacist views. And
frankly, most people will be very happy about that. Except for white
supremacists. This is lipstick-on-a-pig stuff; they can't make it
scientific, but they're trying to make it sound that way, because
white supremacists are losing, and they hate losing. Indeed, they're
white supremacists because they want to win without, you know,
actually doing anything to deserve it.

Meanwhile, the whole thing is kind of insulting to me and my precious
ego. So here's the thing, if you do believe in "great replacement":
I've been in the Baha'i Faith for over twenty five years. Over these
years, Baha'i communities have fought against racism (perhaps not as
successfully as we like), and we actually _encourage_ interracial
marriage. Our little Sunday school is going to get going this weekend
for a new school year, and of the six families registered, five are
interracial! This isn't at all atypical of our children's
classes. We have communities all over America just like this, and even more through the entire world - in fact, there are more Baha'is
*in the developing world* (nudge nudge) than anywhere else. Indeed,
we've come a long way from our founding nearly two hundred years ago
in (here it comes) **Iran**. And yet, when people go looking for the
villians of "the great replacement," they blame it on... *Jews*?  Are
you freakin' kidding me? How tired can you get, man? No creativity
whatsoever, just use the same thing you've been using for two millenia
now... *sigh*

What does it take to get some publicity around here?