---
title: About Those Social Justice Warriors
---

## About Those "Social Justice Warriors" Ruining that Old-Time Religion
This is not a political post. Yet there are certainly those who will
see it as entirely political.

People have started to notice that churches in America are starting to empty
out. Not all at once, mind you, but slowly over time, things are
starting to come to the same pass that things were in Europe by
mid-twentieth century. A nation filled with numerous, nearly empty
churches.

If you'd been an avid consumer of mass media, this trend may come as
something of a shock. Certainly, in popular culture, references to
religious activities have been rare for quite obvious reasons; a
sitcom family is far less appealing if they join a particular church
that many Americans are ill-disposed toward. But in the news, the
story was always focused on declines of mainline protestant churches
only.  Meanwhile, evangelical churches were always on the cusp of
triumph, as their megachurches filled, their shows became ever more
present on cable, and their favored politicians became elected again
and again.

The truth is actually otherwise. Christianity as a whole has been
losing followers steadily. Certain trends had masked this. Evangelical
churches, far from appealing to atheists and the "unchurched,"
generally grew by poaching members from the mainline
churches. Likewise, megachurches have continued their growth by
pulling people in from mid-sized and smaller congregations. It is not
at all hard to find many small churches on the ropes; I've heard that
the median size for a church is under one hundred enrolled
members. Most such churches cannot afford maintenance of their
buildings and decent salaries for their pastors. Under such a
circumstances, new churches are not going to open; you would need at
least that many families just to justify renting a building (probably
in a nearby church whose main congregation is emptying out). It is
probable that in the next few decades, the actual number of churches
will drop sharply as compared to the number of Christian believers.

Christians who have avoided the Fox News Conservative Happy
Talk Bubble have notice these trends, and many of them have started to
cast about for blame. From their own commentary, there seems to be an
obvious cause - that of *secularization*. People no longer feel the need
to engage in a church. Many have noted that many Americans still feel
a strong spiritual connection, but still do not wish to join a church.

Were Christianity like any other business, this sort of situation
would focus the mind quite clearly. You look at what your challenges
are, what your opportunities are, and how to meet them. If you're in
the business of religion, many actions should prevent themselves.
There are several I can think of... Focus on guiding people
spiritually. Treat people's needs with respect. Make sure people's
tithes go towards efforts that help relieve suffering, instead of
building physical plan, evangelical PR efforts and charities of
dubious effectiveness. Give people's intelligence a little
credit. Help people to become better people. Lead people on the
spiritual path without forcing doctrine and outdated beliefs down
their throat.

-------------------------------

But for those who _like_ how churches have been doing things and are
resistant to any sort of change, this is not in the cards.

Many of the people active in Christian circles - particularly
evangelical - are quite happy with churches as they are. The problem
with falling membership is not that it means that people's spiritual
needs are unmet. The problem, rather, is that "their tribe" is getting
weaker. Their tribe, of course, being the conventional conservative
Christian, a tribe that has managed to mold evangelical Christianity
into a forceful cause for maintaining a socially conservative,
business-as-usual mindset among a large bloc of Americans. Such people
like Christianity not because they actually like what this Jesus
fellow said - they hardly quote the guy - but because these Christian
churches enforce a world view they very much like. This world view has
the additional, happy (to their mind) effect of keeping the more
idealistic members focused on cultivating their inner selves or
involved in missionary work in remote locations rather than meddling
with existing social structures and carrying out meddlesome "fixes" to
cure racism, economic inequality, environmental degredation, policing
and a host of other social ills of society.

For such people, it would be far better if the source of the decline
were identified somewhere outside of the church, to avoid changing
anything internally. And they would love it even better if they could
somehow blame this on some _bete noire_ that they were already upset
with. So it is unsurprising to find that many of them now blame the
decline of churches on the enemy they wanted to see - social liberals.

And so I've seen two recent wrongheaded articles in the pointy-headed
long-form magazines (one in the _Atlantic_, the other I can't recall)
in which right-leaning believers misdiagnose the problem with the loss
of vitality in religious institutions. Their dubious diagnosis is that
in sooooo many churches, the pastors are "selling out" to the
so-called <*cue ominous music*> "social justice warriors." A social
justice warrior, as far as I can tell, appears to be a moniker given
to those valuing the elimination of racism and sexism, environmental
degredation and extremes of wealth and poverty by those who do not
particularly care about those things but don't like to be viewed as
people who don't care about those things. It is claimed that these
social justice warriers make others uncomfortable with their *virtue
signaling *(a phenomonon that usually exists only in the accuser's
head). They accuse such people of co-opting Christianity and thereby
weakening it by driving away believers who don't agree with their
viewpoint.

-------------------------------

There are two problems with this analysis. One is obvious empirical
research showing the contrary. The other is a structural reason so
obvious that it is a wonder anyone would even voice this analysis out
loud - an argument so circular and flawed that anyone holding these
views whould immediately distance themselves from it should they be
forced to read their argument out loud.

Emperically, here's the problem - there is no reason to think that
this correlation is causation. It is true that mainline denominations
- and to be clear, those denominations are far more amenable to
socially liberal concerns than other denominations - have been losing
members for decades. If this were causational, then they would lose
these people to more conservative denominations. And on top of this,
conservative denominations would be growing _above and beyond_ the
cohort of people defecting to conservative denominations. But
statistics say that isn't the case. In particular, there hasn't been
growth in the evangelical churches for at least twenty years. Indeed,
for christianity as a whole, the picture has been one of steady
uniform decline since the mid-century once you aggregate _all_
denominations.

After the civil rights movement, you could be forgiven for not
realizing that. That's because from the sixties to the eighties, there
was a visible bump in evangelical church rolls. Evangelicals could
pretend that they were somehow immune to the decline. With hindsight,
we now know that was not the case. The growth of evangelical churches
was a temporary bump, a one-time adjustment caused by mainline
parishioners uncomfortable with the civil rights movement leaving for
the more conservative churches. It was not as a result of drawing in
unbelievers and the unchurched; rather, it could be shown evangelical
churches shed believers at roughly the same rate as the mainline
churches. This fact was hidden by the shift of disgruntled
conservatives from the mainlines to the evangelical denominations.
Now the sorting sorting process having taken place, it is obvious that
the rate of retreat of mainline and evangelical churches are now
roughly on par.

The writers are right to be concerned that churches are losing
membership, but thanks to the sorting that has already occurred,
claims this is due to political partisanship does not stand up to
scrutiny. There are many churches catering to political partisans of
all strips, and all seem to be losing people uniformly. Making
mainline churches more hospitable to those who object to airing of
moderate left-of-center concerns sparked by honest moral reasoning
will not stem this decline.

So that's the emperical case. What about the structural objection to
this argument?

The phrase "social justice warrier" is used by many of these
ostensible Christians as a sarcastic moniker, something which shows
only slightly less contempt than the epithet of "bleeding heart
liberal." Therein lies the problem. Many of these "social justice
warriors" are _exactly the people drawn into following religious
teachings_. These sorts of things are exactly their reason for
religious engagment.

Pick up a "red letter" edition of the Bible and read that. While
you're doing that, note the stuff that appears in red, the stuff the
itinerant Jewish carpenter said. Are you telling me the problem is
that there are now religious leaders and fellow parishoners who
_actually seem to be listening to what that stuff in the red letters
say?_ Is that your problem?

This is not a real problem. It is a problem with those who like
churches the way they during the eighties, with growing membership
rolls and social influence.  For such evangelical Christians, the last
decades of the twentieth century were a shining, glorious moment for
their movement: the blossomming of an apparently ascendent worldview
that could pretend that God, capitalism and conservative political
beliefs could all be on the same side. That moment is past. Eventually
God is going to have his way. Everything else will have to come after
that.
