---
title: How is "Sex Work" a Thing, Anyway?
---

# "Sex Worker": How is This Even a Thing, Anyway?

I tend to read a lot of left-of-center press - and even leftist. The
reasons I feel are not so much intellectual as availability. Call it
the "availability bias" of intellectually respectable press - while I
think of myself as a "nonpartisan," currently the antichrists of
nationalism and racialism seem to have a firm grip on one side of the
political ledger, leading to my lopsided reading diet. Or, if you want
a critique of current materialists viewponts and the capitalist status
quo, those on the right seem to have given up with serious
critiques. Maybe if the publications weren't entirely funded by hedge
club and extraction industry billionares...

One problem with press of "the left" is running across occasional
nonsense. One of the more irritating things I've heard from it -
although sometimes the libertarian far right says it too - is the idea
that "sex work" is somehow a dignified profession, that it's no
different than any other service profession, like nurse or doctor, and
should be publicly acknowledgeed and respected.

How is this a thing? Really?

Not so long ago, it was agreed that sex work was coercive, by its very
definition. The presumption was that _no one_ would agree to do this
unless they were disadvantaged in some way - desperate for money, tied
to a pimp, or enslaved to a expensive drug problem. More enlightened
politicians and law enforcement departments, realizing this, stopped
throwing prostitutes into jail, and started concentrating on the pimps
and the johns, which supplied the the money that made the whole
underground marketplace go. This is all well and good.

Is there a problem? Well, not insofar as it goes.

Except we live in a capitalist system. And guess what? It seems there
are a handful of young women who decide that this is somehow a career
path for them. And now they want the respect that is due for any
profession.

So now we have to spend time relitigating just why prostitution is bad
in the first place. Unfortunately, protests have been ineffective as
people on "the right" seem to be unable to do anything but thunder
from the pulpit, while people on "the left" are generally so taken
with sexual libertinism that they either have knee-jerk support for
those causes or remain disgusted, but can't put their finger on just
why. And the libertarian fringe is all to eager to legalize it, since
they have the money to enjoy what they presume would be a smorgasbord
of sexual experiences offered to them. So I'd like to spell out some
problems, the sorts that are immediately obvious yet forgotten amid
knee-jerk modern reactions.

Number one: ever heard of a woman in her late twenties or older going
into sex work? No, neither have I. It's always someone who starts
stripping or doing live camera work in their late teens and then
"graduates" to this profession. There's a reason for that - during
your teenage years, your brain isn't formed. And they aren't as likely
to think of any consequences in the long term.

And what are those consequences? Well, the "sex workers" say they have
there are and should not be any. But of course not - they're sex
workers! Indeed, the desire for legitimization is to address the one
consequence of their actions they cannot control - the opprobium that
comes with their decision to work in this field. What they want is to
retire with honor, so that one day when their looks start to fade,
they can take their banked savings, kick back and have kids with a
nice normal husband, a single guy who will magically appear in their
late thirties to give them children. But of course, normal men don't
want to marry former sex workers. The legitimization of "sex work"
isn't going to change that.
  
And this leads to the second point: plenty of women are not thrilled
with the prospect of legitimization of this work. Let's remember, this
is America. Anything that can be corrupted my moneyed interests will
be corrupted by moneyed interests. Ever see the modeling agencies in
the mall trying to entice attractive young women into working for them
and becoming a star? Imagine that, times fifty, if sex work is
legitimized, as agencies for businesses taking a modest cut of this
pay blanket the country in an effort to expand their business and keep
the supply readily available. Imagine a crotchety old relative saying
young women should be able to pay a full college tuition using
"nothing but her looks." Imagine young twentysomethings being told
that she's a chump if she doesn't use that line of work to "cash in".

"Oh, but it's not like that. We could regulate it just like they do in
Amsterdam." Riiiight, regulation. How interesting to hear a
libertarian argument pull in *regulation* as a way of fixing the
deregulation of something. Yes, we could regulate this work. We can
fix global warming. We can feed every hungry child in the world. We
can fix the public school system. But we in America will do *none* of
these things, and you can bet that this sort of regulation will be
done for the benefit of the newly-legitimate pimps and johns, not for
said workers.

The ultimate irony is that the legitimization of your work is hardly
in the financial interests of sex workers. Part of the appeal for
working in sex work is the financial rewords caused by scarcity - most
people simply aren't desperate enough to fill that need. As a result,
you can make good money because there are so few people willing to
prostitute themselves (literally) that way. The legitimization of sex
work is going to cause a literal economic race-to-the-bottm. Are the
sex workers so taken with themselves that they think they have
particularly unique and difficult-to-replicate talents? I can assure
you as a man (and let's face it - almost all "sex work" consists of a
man paying for a woman's services) that men who seek out sex workers
have exactly one desire - it's right there in the name! This is not
"rent a girlfriend" and no one is going to pay you if you shut off the
tap. That unique, special service you're giving is one nearly all
women are equipped to fulfill.

So if I can do my part to shout down this discussion, I'm happy and
humbled by the opportunity to do so.