---
title: The Uses of Philosophy
---

# The Uses of Philosophy

or

### Don't We Know Everything Already, Anyway?

I've of late been embarking on a study of philosophy. Part of this is
to fill in a void in my educational background - being in engineering
at a state school as an undegrad, I had little education in
the Liberal Arts; and my graduate school studies in STEM field certainly
didn't adress any deficiency.
But there is a bigger question - what is philosophy good for,
anyway? How does it help the world, and more specifically, the causes
I'm interested in helping?

Philosophy itself is certainly not a field for popular study. It has a
reputation as being excessively pointy-headed. This can be seen in the
split between serious philosophy and books that sell as philosophy. If
you go into a large enough bookstore, it will have its own philosophy
section - mostly full of Penguin classics, books about atheism and its
defenders, and various readers. However, you are unlikely to see
anything "current" unless it happens to be either controversial or
only loosely concerned with philosophy. Someone, upon surveying this,
might think there are probably only a few conceivable goals one might
have to study philosophy. Perhaps one may do this to either appear
"well rounded" in conversation by familiarizing oneself with ideas of
import in the past, no matter how disregarded or unscientific these
ideas are. Or perhaps one has an antireligous interest; for those
people, the philosophy book section seems to serve the same function as the
religious book section does for believers. Members of both groups want
to read books to assure themselves that they are right, and all those
_other people_ are stupid, evil or both.

I suppose the classical goals of philosophy are really the good ones -
the study of truth, self-examination, all that yada yada. But that is
something the field itself seems to have given up on, for some very
good reasons. Science seems to have claimed for itself the seat of
truth. Indeed, many scientists themselves believe there is now no use
of philosophy, just as there is no use to religion. If something is
emperically testable, then it is part of Science; if not, then it is
not the place for the study of truth. Given the developments in the
late nineteenth and early twentieth century, philosophy itself seemed
to assist in this effort, as positivists and analytic philosophers
heaped scorn on philosophical exercises like metaphysics and
nonemperical approaches, essentially leaving only scientifically
testable truths as the ones worth studying.

If that is the case then, perhaps philosophy is a decent place to
learn how to form arguments, think logically and properly conduct
forensics; a worthy goal, but hardly about finding grand
truths. Perhaps a modern student of philosophy may be more interested
in winning the argument and persuading, actual truth and facts being
besides the point. Here again, a different set of twentieth century
philosophers have assisted this effort, as many have assailed truth
itself as a social construct, imposed by those in power. And there
have been other concerns by philosophers that any attempt to establish
truth definitively may be harmful, if the end result is to attempt a
final edifice to be imposed upon poeple. While such arguments have
some compelling moral insights, the movement away from truth may give
philosophy itself a bad name. Indeed, I recently read an article on
Brexit, which has proven itself to be a bad idea sold through
lies. The root cause analysys blamed the educational background of the
British political class. These elites typically have a heavy
background in philosophy and law, producing a generation of "rotters"
whose main skill was at debating on their feet and hoodwinking people
in arguments instead of producing things of value. It seems truth was
never a concern for such people.

Perhaps we can take a counterintuitive notion, and say that it is
really religion that is the study of truth. This is counterintuitive
because no one has seriously proposed this; a lot of philosophers,
particularly of the analytic persuasion, will say that all religion is
nonsense. Indeed, such philosophers sometimes seem like
frozen-in-amber copies of 18th century philosophers, railing at The
Church as if it still had the same power and sway over society as it
did in the middle ages. Meanwhile, other philosophers and scientists
(they aren't all atheists!) will tell you there are two _magesteria_,
such as they call it. Science is for the study of certain verifiable
truths, religion is for the study of certain truths not illuminated by
scientists, and perhaps philosophy is about how these work
together. But this nice little theory doesn't hold up to scrutiny in
real life. It should stand to reason that if there is one reality,
there will be areas of practical overlap, in ethics and phenomenology,
for instance. Without addressing these overlaps, religion simply
functions as a spackle to cover areas of ignorance, to be slowly
chipped away as science progresses. Thus we get the atheistic
scientists' "God of the gaps," a God borne of ignorance that nobody
believes in, but that atheists seem to strongly believe the religious
believe in.

In any event, what we seem to be left with is a philosophy with a
modest, utilitarian goal of improved argumentation. This leaves a lot
on the table. The "big questions" philosophy used to address don't go
away just because science can't answer it easily. So why do we read
and study philosophy?

## A Modest Proposal

A better approach may be to regard philosophy as invaluable tool in
the _search_ for truth. The American pragmatist school, though not
quite as influential now than it was a century ago, still looms large, and
it has never claimed to be about the study of any single truth per se.
Instead, its focus was about how to search for and recognize truth.
Giving people the tools to be able to search for truth and recognize
errors is invaluable, and seems a far more noble an aim than simply
dominating others in verbal exchanges. And note that by the "search
for truth," I'm not talking about the solipistic tendency shared by
all to seek out confirming views of our existing biases; instead, I'm
talking about the tools for thinking critically about ones
pre-existing views and purge from them the errors that tend to creep
into the thinking of all.

I would like to put forth a different set of uses for philosophy:
* A tool to the independent investigation of the truth
* A tool for producing shared, concrete understanding between people
* A tool for analyzing real problems of collective governance

This is mainly after the aims of the Baha'i Faith. Those who study the
Baha'i Faith have a genuine interest in philosophy, but their concerns
may be different than the typical student. Foundationally, Baha'i
doctrine insists on the concept of God as an unknowable entity. While
this makes its theology much closer to the "God of the Philosophers,"
it does presume that there are certain things of importance that
simply are unknowable. Actual knowledge of The Truth is seen to be
contingent as well, as all means of verification are faulty. So like
much contemporary philosophy, it does not think of the field as the
study of The Truth, so much as _investigation_ of the truth.

The above proposal, therefore, is that philosophy is of use for
investigating the truth and settling on answers to allow progress to
move forward - not to settle truth for once and for all. Additionally,
there are aims for this search of truth; while settling truth for
oneself may be desired, it is necessary to commit to a solutions
that many can collectively agree on. And likewise, that this must have
proper aims; under the Baha'i faith, the aim of the development of
mankind, civilization, and proper governance. Here, the philosophical
basics such as sound reason and agreement on known facts are of
considerable importance. Finally, the aims of he Baha'i Faith hold
collective governance as of special importance, making philosophical
fields such as ethics of particular importance.
