---
title: Quatloos, Cryptocurrency and the Need for Chaos
---

## Quatloos, Cryptocurrency and the Need for Chaos

One of the more depressing incidents in my life was the time
I was empaneled on a federal jury for over 4 (!) weeks. It was a regrettable
waste of time that I have only a somewhat funny, but sort of sad, story from
it.

The case was a tax fraud case. The woman who was charged had apparently
bliked the IRS out of over $600,000 dollars. Working with someone else,
who was unnamed and not at that trial, she had managed to claim large,
erroneous tax deductions. The funny part is how it went down. The woman
continued to live in the same home (with a brand new extension), with the signs
of her newfound wealth all around. When they raided her home, they even
found a new safe installation, unlocked, with a hundred thousand
dollars of South African gold coins. Obviously, the defendent thought
this fraud was something she could easily get away with.

Inexplicably, the woman _chose to defend herself_ in court. She did
have a court-appointed attorney, who struggled mightily. The defendent
kept trying to raise nonexistent laws, point to nonexistent treaties,
tried to distinguish between a "tax identity" (who owed the tax) and
a "legal person" (the person in the court, who did not owe tax); she
was repeatedly redirected by her court-appointed attorney and slapped
down time and again by the judge. References were made to a person
whom was paid $200,000 for assistance with this scheme who, apparently,
provided this woman no service other than to sign a few forms to help
her bilk our collective treasury. The defense attorney tried a few times to
more fully explain their partner's importance, but the prosecutor would
have none of it; in any event, there was no exculpatory evidence that
would've excused the defendant's behavior.

As the jury we took no more than a half-hour deliberating, as we kept
coming up with increasingly imaginative theories that might, maybe, somehow
explain this behavior. She was so obviously guilty though, that after
our patience ran out, we delivered the verdict an hour later.
As I left, I had to think to myself - what made this woman think she
could get away with it? Why did she think she could defend herself
in court with these bizarre legal theories? And as for her shadowy
partner - what was his role in it, and why did this line of questioning
seem to be the
only thing the prosecutor was worried about?

As a jury member you can't do "freelance" legal research when you're
on the jury, but as soon as you deliver the verdict, there's nothing
to keep you from digging. And I found pay-dirt on a website called
<https://quatloos.com>. Her mysterious partner, as it turns out, was
in Canada fighting extradition after having been involved in over a
dozen so-called "Sovereign Citizen" cases. It was a scam, pure and simple.
The Sovereign Citizen movement is one that holds that the government
is not your governmet unless you "opt in" to be ruled. This "movement" -
really, just a handful of loons out west - had caused fits with tax
attorneys for years by tying up courts with bizarre legal theories.
The defendent, unfortunately, was a mark for a person who had essentially
"monetized" the whole sovereign citizen shtick - he'd walk his poor
sucker through the paperwork needed to defraud the government, take
around a quarter of a million dollars essentially just for filing
a few fraudulent papers and immediately wire the proceeds to
a Swiss bank account. He also coached the defendent on the legal
theories he claimed would make her "untouchable" in the court case;
naturally, he was long gone by the time the defendent went on
trial.

So ordinarily this would simply be a sad story with a sad ending. 
It's pretty obvious why the
prosecutor didn't want any unnecessary discussion about the person she
was working with. It's almost enough to feel sorry for that woman. Except...
... this was not just any mark, and she was not exactly naive. She 
was someone with college degree and a semi-functional
career who went through a messy divorce and got behind on morgage
payments, and rather than sell the homestead, grabbed at whatever she could
to "get ahead." Given what we knew,
there was no way she didn't realize she was bilking her fellow taxpayers
out of over half a million dollars. She didn't think this was a victimless
crime - she simply thought _she could get away
with it_. It's hard to think how much of this was
sheer gullibility, and how much of this was thievery, but the law does
not differentiate. On some level, she knew she was bankrupting our treasury,
and she didn't care, because she felt that the government was fraudulent
and that big ol' pile of money belonged to whoever had the guts to take it. 
Those who paid our taxes were simply chumps.

Which leads us to...

### Cryptocurrency

Speaking of which, it appears my least-favorite, most opaque technology
is now in the news as the least-favorite investment opportunity.
A raft of cryptocurrency ads in the 2022 Super Bowl seemed to be the
starting gun for the bursting of the crypto bubble, a 22-year old echo of the 2000
Super Bowl underwritten by the ads of soon-to-be Dot-Bomb companies.
What started as a promising but flawed attempt as a small microtransaction
network has balooned into a giant pyramid scheme consisting of 90% hype,
10% carbon dioxide emissions and 0% actual utility. I had invested some
time investigating cryptocurrencies maybe six years ago and backed out after finding
out several disturbing technical issues - including, crucially, the fact
that deflationary currencies always fail as currencies. So I was left to watch
incredulously as this became an enormously lucrative pump-and-dump scheme
for others not being myself. Sort of
like the dot-com boom but without any actual value creation.

I probably shouldn't mind the fact that people got undeservingly rich off
of bitcoin. People get lucky all the time, and it doesn't necessarily come
at anyone's expense. Well, in this case it will, since there will eventually
be bagholders who get pennies on their dollar investment. Still, one should 
be no more jealous of
bitcoin millionares than anyone who sold their Beanie Babies at the peak
of the market craze.

Oddly, if you look at the financial papers, you will see this is
treated as a commodity - an extremely volatile one, but a commodity nonetheless.
Something that never happened with Beanie Babies.
Why? Because of investor interest. Companies are actually "investing" in
cryptocurrencies, in much the same way one would invest in coppoer futures.
They may not be investments in the sense of directly helping people who
are building or expanding businesses. But this investment does serve for others,
in that you are serving as a placeholder for
someone who does not or can not purchase said resource now, but
will later want to - and for compensation for the risk you take, should
the resource go down in value. Unlike a commodity though, your eventual purchaser
will never be someone who consumes the commodity - it will always be someone who wishes
to trade your place as a holder of this commodity.

In short, the only purpose of this is as a way to _introduce_ volatility
into your porfolio, without actually hedging anything. And that is why
it is taken seriously as an "investment." It is a very odd sort of security
that introduces volatility into your portfolio without otherwise adding
anything as far as expected gains or value.

Why would you want to do that?

Well, that gets back to the story I told at the beginning of the post. 

### The Need for Chaos

Depressingly, psychologists have identified a particular personality type;
not quite a pathology mind you, but troubling personality characteristic.
It appears some people have "[a need for chaos]<https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33611991/>."*
Yes, that's right. There's a meaningful single-digit percentage of people that
have a desire to see a world in chaos. People who have 
are giving a quiz and actually answer "Yes, I would like to see all
that exists destroyed so we can start over." "I want to light a fire
just to watch it burn." Surprisingly, this does not
correspond to "dark triad pathologies as much as one would think.

So, what do people who put themselves in jail due to their eagerness to
believe in and exploit nonexistent legal theories and people who lobby for
the ratification of a currency so volatile that it is use is as a high-volatility
asset whose only actual use-case is ransomware and illegal trafficking?
The common thread among these turns out to be the "need for chaos." A desire
to see the world turned upside-down, if for no other reason than to see it turned
upside down.

The question is, why would people believe this when, as discussed in the article,
these people are not always malevolent? It turns out that the impetus for this
is _status_. Or rather, a perceived inapproprate status vis a vis other elements
in society. The people with "need for chaos" are actually not the lowest-status
members of society; these aren't panhandlers and criminals. In fact, they are people 
who realistically are middle-status -
people with jobs and family connections but who, for some reason, do not feel they
have the status they "deserve."

If you avoid any moral considerations, this is actually a _rational_ viewpoint,
provided you're desperate enough to one-up your neighbor. Consider:

* Low-status people generally are desireous of "ordinary" status; that is, to be just
like the average person. If you are low-status, working your way to an ordinary 
social status is something
you can do, and you probably know how to do it. You may need a helping hand, but
if your string of bad luck ends (and for a lot of people, that's all it is), you
will work your way out of it.

* But consider the life of someone who is ordinary status and desperate for a position
of high status. Why would you have a "need for chaos"? Because if society remains
stable, raising your status will be quite difficult and is dependent on luck, a
large amount of effort, or probably both. 

So it may actually pay to take big
gambles on high risk actions they can afford to take without endangering their
modest status - investing in
high-volatility assets you hope pay off big; becoming emotionally invested in efforts
you help will turn finance upside-down; voting for
authoritarian politicians who vow to "shake things up". Risks of all sorts become
very compelling then - especially risks viewed as having very little realistic
downside for yourself (and if the downside is for others, so much the better).

But in all likelihood, such people, envious of the place of others in society,
aren't making rational calculations. Instead,
they'll fall victim to motivated reasoning, and may find it all to easy to get
pulled into conspiracy
theories. I suspect the poor woman I helped put in jail for tax fraud was just such
a person. There are plenty more malevolent people that will never come anywhere
close to jail time, yet will do all they can to
burn down the world if it hurts others they don't like.

------------------------------------------

Of course, there are some people - call them your radical reformers - who want
to improve the world, by peaceful revolution if necessary (for argument's sake,
let's pretend that's actually possible). 
A radical, democratic remaking of society. There are actually
a somewhat greater percentage of people who actually want to remake the world order
_without_ anything that would destroy or hurt anyone, yet would still wish to
see the existing order brought down, even if dislocation was the result.
These are people the paper framed as "rebuilders";
people who seem to be of genuinely good will, but who feel that massive disruption
is the only answer to society's problems.

Is this a valid viewpoint? At this point, I get to dig out Baha'i quotes.

If you have only a surface knowledge about the Baha'i Faith, you might think the
Baha'i writings would actually be somewhat indulgent - perhaps even supportive of
such an attitude. After all, isn't the Baha'i Faith all about building a new society?
Isn't it about remaking society in a more just image?

If you believe this you are mistaken. There is no place in religious movements
for a "need for chaos." In the Baha'i writings, such an attitude is just a temptation
toward fanaticism and sedition, not an enlightened spiritual response.

>   On the one hand the Pen of the Most High hath forbidden all men to engage 
>   in sedition, contention or conflict, and on the other that same Pen hath 
>   sent down these most sublime words: 'Should anyone, in the presence of 
>   the Manifestation, discover an evil intention on the part of any soul, 
>   he must not oppose him, but must leave him to God.'
>                   (Baha'u'llah, Epistle to the Son of the Wolf, p. 109)

>   What mankind needeth in this day is obedience unto them that are in 
>   authority, and a faithful adherence to the cord of wisdom. The instruments 
>   which are essential to the immediate protection, the security and assurance 
>   of the human race have been entrusted to the hands, and lie in the grasp, 
>   of the governors of human society. This is the wish of God and His decree....
>             (Baha'u'llah, Gleanings from the Writings of Baha'u'llah, p. 206)

>   ... the widespread differences that exist among mankind and the prevalence 
>   of sedition, contention, conflict and the like are the primary factors 
>   which provoke the appearance of the satanic spirit. Yet the Holy Spirit 
>   hath ever shunned such matters. A world in which naught can be perceived 
>   save strife, quarrels and corruption is bound to become the seat of the 
>   throne, the very metropolis, of Satan.
>                    (Baha'u'llah, Tablets of Baha'u'llah, p. 176)

>   Sedition hath never been pleasing unto God, nor were the acts committed 
>   in the past by certain foolish ones acceptable in His sight. Know ye 
>   that to be killed in the path of His good pleasure is better for you than to kill.
>                    (Baha'u'llah, The Summons of the Lord of Hosts, p. 110)

And one more from His son, just in case that wasn't enough for you.

>   On the other side the faithless wax in hate and rancour, ceaselessly stirring 
>   up grievous sedition and mischief. No day goeth by but someone raiseth 
>   the standard of revolt and spurreth his charger into the arena of discord. 
>   No hour passeth but the vile adder bareth its fangs and scattereth its deadly venom.
>
>   The beloved of the Lord are wrapped in utter sincerity and devotion, unmindful 
>   of this rancour and malice. Smooth and insidious are these snakes, these 
>   whisperers of evil, artful in their craft and guile. Be ye on your guard 
>   and ever wakeful! Quick-witted and keen of intellect are the faithful, and 
>   firm and steadfast are the assured. Act ye with all circumspection!
>          (Abdu'l-Baha, Selections from the Writings of Abdu'l-Baha, p. 314)

If Baha'i scripture isn't good enough for you, here's a few others:

>   Do not spread corruption on earth after it has been so well ordered. 
>   Call unto Him with fear and longing. 
>                                            - The Koran, "The Heights" 7:56

>   Then said Jesus unto him, “Put up again thy sword into his place, for all 
>   they that take the sword shall perish with the sword.
>                                            - Matthew 26:52

For those of you who have read the writings of Shoghi Effendi, you're probably aware
that he was a stickler for obedience to recognized government authorities. Yet, of the central
figures he may have wrote the strongest words of condemnation for the present world order.

>   A world, dimmed by the steadily dying-out light of religion, heaving with the 
>   explosive forces of a blind and triumphant nationalism; scorched with the fires 
>   of pitiless persecution, whether racial or religious; deluded by the false 
>   theories and doctrines that threaten to supplant the worship of God and the 
>   sanctification of His laws; enervated by a rampant and brutal materialism; 
>   disintegrating through the corrosive influence of moral and spiritual decadence; 
>   and enmeshed in the coils of economic anarchy and strife -- such is the 
>   spectacle presented to men's eyes...
>                            (Shoghi Effendi, The Advent of Divine Justice, p. 46)

Yet, even if the Old World Order is tottering, he was extremely clear - the Baha'is
are not here to push it over the edge! We are to be supportive of our institutions
of government. This is _not_ because we have been asked to huddle cowardly in the
darkness and avoid attracting attention to ourselves, nor is it because we uniformly
support the policies of our government. Instead, the reason is eminently laid out
in all of the excerpts I gave earlier. The "need for chaos" is not something that
bespeaks a spiritually healthy individual, and is not something we should cultivate
in ourselves, no matter how incensed we are with the injustices of the world.

Because the "need for chaos" is not borne of a desire for justice. It is borne
of *pride*. This is easy to see in _burn it all down_ folk identified in the 
psychology papers; they are
suffering from nothing more than status envy and jealousy, and wish to destroy
everything on the chance it improves their lot over others they dislike. But those
who wish to rebuild society might wish to reflect that their own need for chaos
may not be borne simply from a hunger for justice, but a hunger to cut down evildoers,
as if a cleansing revolution will serve as the perfect judge and jury for all
of mankind. Not for nothing are Baha'is told to practice detachment. If violent
revolutions were all that were needed to bring justic to the land, then we would
all be living in paradise.

But yeah, if you know some of these "need for chaos" types, maybe just try to
keep them busy with some sort of odd jobs the first Tuesday of November. _Very_ busy.

* Arceneaux K, Gravelle TB, Osmundsen M, Petersen MB, Reifler J, Scotto TJ. "Some 
people just want to watch the world burn: the prevalence, psychology and 
politics of the 'Need for Chaos'". _Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci._
2021 Apr 12;376(1822):20200147. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2020.0147. Epub 2021 Feb 22. 
Erratum in: _Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci._ 2021 May 24;376(1825):20210064. 
PMID: 33611991; PMCID: PMC7934998.
