---
title: How to Baha'i (the Secular Edition)
category: article
---

# How to Baha'i (for seculars and skeptics)

## Or: Being Baha'i for the Non-Believer

I try to write this blog for others - whoever may stumble across
it. But I have to write about what I know, which narrows things
down quite a bit. In particular, I'm interested in philosophy and
religion. That rules out a bunch of people.

I'm not writing this for me though. I'm writing this for you.
Who are you? Well, given that you're reading long-form blog posts...

There is a particular type of
personality which is, I would say... well, not un-spiritual, but
certainly not spiritual in the sense of "in tune with the universe" and
"seeking the eternal one" and "following God in all its forms"
and _Woooooooooo_. They certainly don't enjoy sitting around with
their thoughts and deeply meditating and roaming the astral plains.
They don't pray to something they regard as a Babylonian Sky God and
bristle at the notion at the mention of worship of any entity.
Instead, they view religion and spirituality on entirely pragmatic
terms. Where religion and spirituality work, it's very selectively.
And generally it's personal - for them only.

If this clicks for you, then you're who I want to talk to. You don't
necessarily think of yourself as atheistic, but too much of
religion is alienating, and spirituality is often too new-agey and
smelling of humbug to speak to you. But you might be interested in things
done by religious people - meditation, yoga, retreats, etc.
And you're definitely interested in becoming a better person,
improving every year in your outlook, balance, and ability to
serve others in humanity.

If you then have any use for religion it's self-development. Or more
to the point, if you have to listen to a spiritual leader, your
attitude is:

    Just shut up and tell me how to improve myself. Otherwise
    let me make up my own mind.

You probably aren't waiting for people to give you orders - and
wouldn't like it if they did! - but you'd appreciate a path that
will make you feel better and be a
better person for others - one that will help you have better
relationships. And you aren't going to be forced on any "spirit
quests" to discover your "inner light." You figure it ought to be
simpler than that, and shouldn't require a guru.

Are you like that? I know I am.

One of the ironies is that for all the talk of each generation being
less religious than the one before it, is that there is still
plenty of
interest in the
"deeper" self-help philosophies, if you will. Think about the interest
in Buddhist thought and the followings in some areas of the
Stoic philosophy. Such philosophies don't require you to buy into
a notion of spirit realms you can't see. What they do, instead, is
to tell you what to do in order to be a "better person." That's
in quotes because the definition of that is usually up for grabs.

I'm convinced that this skeptical outlook is reflective of a distinct 
"religious personality," and such people can
benefit from study of the Baha'i Faith _without_ immediately buying into the
theological beliefs underpinning it. Personally I am a Baha'i, but to confess,
I frequently relate better to the skeptical sort than those who immerse
themselves entirely in the belief system, noble as it is. 
People practice meditation, yoga,
journaling and a host of other "spiritual" practices to better themselves,
all the while professing absolute disinterest in anything spiritual. If
you want to call yourself a Buddhist, by all means learn and practice it
in its fullness, but _anyone_ can befit from that practice, Buddhist
or not. I'm betting that if you _practice_ the Baha'i Faith, you can benefit
from it and eventually recognize some deeper truths, without forcing
yourself at any time to bury reasonable doubts about any religious path.
If I have an ulteriour motive in writing this, it's only because I hope
that some of you, upon practicing, may one day be moved to associate
yourself with the Baha'i community on a deeper level.

In my opinion, the founder of the Baha'i Faith, Baha'u'llah recognized
people like you in one of his
own writings. In a writing called 
_The Four Valleys_, he talked about four types of "spiritual wayfarers" if
you will:

>   If the wayfarers be among them that seek after **the sanctuary of the 
>   Desired One**, this plane pertaineth to the self—but the self which 
>   is intended is “the Self of God that pervadeth all His laws”. 
>   In this station the self is not rejected but beloved; it 
>   is regarded with favour and is not to be shunned. 

This passage is going to be very obscure to almost all of you. Baha'u'llah 
wrote this for a very particular sort of religiously-minded readers
(in this case, the Sufi mystics of the nineteenth century)
but most Baha'i scholars have interpreted this as
referring to those who find God through their own dedication to self-mastery
and virtuous conduct and adherance to a code of conduct. Again, "just tell me
what to do." 
So for those of you who care not a whit about spirituality, I'll tell
you what I know. How to "Do Baha'i" without actually being Baha'i. Happy
Baha'ing!

## "So, why am I reading this?" you might ask.

One of the things I've noticed is the growing acceptance of Buddhism as
a religion in America. There is a good reason for that. Most religions,
if they approach you at all, will literally try to "convert" you.
If you show any interest at all, they will try to convince you of
a particular point of view, invite you to the various activities,
talk to you about your particular dogmas, all with the goal toward
making you "one of them." They do this, of course, because they actually
believe this is making the world a better place.

The popularizers of Buddhism
have tried to do no such thing. Rather, their approach has been to
teach the _practices_ that actually make the lives of their believers
better. In the case of Buddhism, the practice that has been popularized
is the concept of meditation. Meditation
is now a popular thing to do, it is considered normal and a healthy
thing to do. Indeed, practitioners agree that it makes them into better
people.  This is a far cry from when its original teachers described
the practice sixty years ago to an American public that regarded it
as weird, or at best exotic.

Unfortunately, we are in
late-stage commercialization of the concept, what with 'mindfulness'
apps on our phone and companies pushing this as a "benefit" to employees
stressed out from getting a nonstop stream of push alerts from work 
all hours of the day. But let's get back to the point; in spite of the
hype cycle, meditation is now recognized as a good thing, bringing a
dose of self-discipline and spirituality even to those inclined to
believe in neither.

The beneficiaries, besides us, has been the Buddhist community, which
may not have grown enormously as a result, but has attracted dedicated
followers in the American community. The other growing religious community
to my knowledge is neo-Paganism, which has taken a similar approach, reaching
people one ritual at a time rather than foisting a whole world view onto
people.

My own religious path is the Baha'i Faith. The Baha'i Faith is pretty
simple as far as the core belief. As the Baha'i children's Sunday school
rhyme goes:

>  God is one,
>  Man is one,
>  And all the religions agree.
>  When everyone learns the three oneness'es
>  We'll have world unity.

Unfortunately, even if you agree with the sentiment, and may even feel
grateful we teach our kids this, this statement probably means jack to
you. You aren't going to go out and do anything with this information.
If it agrees with your notions already, perhaps it will make you happy
you're not the only one who feels this way.
And if you dive into some wikipedia article about the Baha'i Faith, you're
not going to be in much better shape, as it discusses core beliefs, theologies,
social laws, demographics, communities in various nations, organization
structures and yada yada yada.

Does Buddhism have all this? Yes. Did
they popularize Buddhism by talking nonstop about this stuff? Not on your
life. Instead, they talked about a core beneficial practice, with the aim
of improving everyone's lives who encountered it.

Hence, this series of writups. I'm going to cover what I think are distinct
Baha'i practices in a series of blog posts. The goal: so that you, the
reader, can benefit from these teachings without buying the whole cable
bundle, so to speak.

So let's begin. In part 1, a discussion of what most people who know of
the Baha'i faith associate with it: peaceful behavior. What's the practice?
You'll find out. And after that, I'll talk about several other practices
that are somewhat distinctive amoung relgions.
