---
title: A Moral Theory of Racism
category: in-progress
---

## A Moral Theory of Racism

One of the issues that has bedeviled our society for hundreds of years
is racism. To some extent, this is seen as odd - given that most people
agrees with the broad tenets that all humans are equal, what is the
reason for racism? Why is it that some people hold such high "racial
resentment" beliefs, beliefs that are easily disproven statistically
and seem more focused on cherry-picked anecdotes? What it is that
causes this weakness?

We all know people with high levels of racial resentment; the people who,
though not overtly racist, sure have a lot of complaints about "those people."
Some of them are people we feel are very decent, at least around us,
"once you get to know them." Others have so many objectionable
characteristics that you hardly notice their racism due to all the other
problems they seem to have.  However much this has been speculated
about, there is little discussion of root causes of this prediliction.

Let's start with religious beliefs. While most religous beliefs have
nothing about racism as such, one has to remember that
racism as a distinct idea actually fairly novel. To
my knowledge, there is only one revealed religion whose origins lie
after the development of theories of race in the 1700s (more on that
later). While those who have neither respect nor knowledge of
religions are happy to pin religion as being at fault, religious teachings
themselves hardly lend support for any support of nationalism or tribalism. If
anything, the three great evangelizing religions of Christianity,
Buddhism and Islam all did their best to deemphasize the importance of
origin and place, if only to facilitate the spread of their
religion. Even though racists have attempted to use scripture of one
sort or other to back up their views, it is unsurprising that their
more tolerant opponents have much easier time finding scriptures that 
overtly backs up their arguments. Racists, on the other hand, have
generally used tortured, tenditious readings of the scripture that
generally would have no purchase in society, were it not for the
existence of powerful people grasping for whatever leverage they could
force out of intentional misreadings.

The one revealed religion I can speak about that does say something
about racism is my own, the Baha'i Faith. Their writings forbid
"racialism" in strong terms. Yet the founder and primary teacher
Baha'u'llah spoke little about racism as such, but in broader strokes,
as reflecting the spiritual equality and essential unity of
mankind. Racism was not identified as a sin, so much as a particuar
type of flaw produced by lack of a virtue. It is regarded as sign of
spiritual immaturity or lack of development. Only later did Baha'i
leaders point out racism as a specific moral danger, particular with
regard to the American community.

If this is the case, then it would stand to reason that racism is
itself due to a particular lack of moral development.
This would imply that the underlying cause, rather than
being due to lack of broadmindedness or education, is primarily due to
a defect in moral reasoning or behavior. And that the solution lies in
efforts to upraise moral behavior, or "spiritual" behavior as regarded
in religious writings.

To discuss moral flaws that lead to racism, and point to possible
solutions, I'd like to detour and discuss an old developmental theory of
morals that illuminates how racist beliefs may reflect lack of moral
development, and how moral development can address these over time.

-----------------------------------------

One of the most notable theories of moral development was propounded
by psychologist Lawrence Kohlberg in a career starting in the late
1950s and going through the 1980s. His theory of moral development has
garnered a fair amount of critique; possibly the most serious was that
of his own student Carol Gilligan, who noted that the test groups used
when developing his theory were entirely male (!), a not-uncommon
flaw of experiments prior to the eighties. Perhaps a more significant
flaw was the conflation between moral _thought_, which is what Kohlberg's
theory attempted to measure, and moral _behavior_. Indeed, much of
what one does as far as behavior is automatic and done without
reflection. I suspect that for this reason, there hasn't been much in
the way of contemporary followers to this theory.

However, in moving away from this model, something has been
lost. Virtues do not develop in a vacuum, and someone's ability to
think morally is necessary to to cultivate them. Additionally,
Kohlberg's framework allows for the fact that society at large tends
to be the frame of reference for the bulk of all people. A society
which cultivates unenlightened beliefs is one in which these
unenlightened beliefs will be reflected by the mass of the people.

Kohlberg's framework posits six stages of moral
development. The first stage, that of young children, is simply that
of

1. avoidance of punishment.

  This is an extremely egocentric
  viewpoint that views morality simply in terms of avoiding punishment
  to oneself,
  without any understanding of the morality behind it (yes, a young
  child has the mind of a psychopath). Fortunately, the does not
  describe the overwhelming majority of adults.

  The next two levels of
  morality are the lowest in which adults are at:

2. Transactional-based; e.g. self-interest
3. Morality as determined by social consensus; e.g. situational ethics

Those are the three lower levels of moral development, passed through
by hopefully all children and adolescents. The three higher levels of
moral development are driven by increasingly abstract principles of
justice. Kohlberg speculated that the two highest levels are only
reached by a minority of people - to the point that he had difficulty
establishing the emperical basis of his final sixth stage of morality,
a sort of Kantian "universal ethics" viewpoint. But the fourth stage,
which most adults read, does point to a sort of law-/norm-driven
behavior in which people recognize laws and moral codes in and of
themselves as necessary.

The things to note about Kohlberg's moral development stage is that
people generally have a vague understanding of the immediate level
above them, but cannot understand the thought process of anyone two
or more levels above them.

Whether or not his theories are true, it is kind of a fun framework -
"look, rate yourself, rate your friends!" It's almost begging for a
Buzzfeed listicle. One can easily imagine the machanics in your own
life; e.g. why the various borderline-sociopath selfish people (level
2s) you know are so angered and flummoxed by marginally more advanced
people who have no trouble accepting ideals that are nothing more than
basic citizenship. Or how most libertarian gatherings are so
fractious, being that the movement attempts to accomodate both "level
2" grifters with naive "level 5" idealists stunned that almost nobody
trusts their movement. Fun thought games, but mostly distractions.

A more serious thought game can be done with the mechanics of racism. Moral
development, and its lack in certain people, has serious reprecussions in the
thought processes of those in the lower levels of development. And
this theory of moral development explains why those at lower scales
are probably significantly more likely to display racist behaviors.

Those in "stage three" reasoning or below are unable to understand
abstract concepts of ethics, period. Moral imperatives may be
explained, but they do not "get" them. They don't even "get" such
concepts as rule-of-law; they will follow the law but only as a form
of social convention that they and their peer group accept. They may,
for example, understand that Martin Luther King and Mahatma Ghandi
were great men, but they have trouble understanding why, aside from
the fact that everyone else they look up to seems to regard them as
great men. They may revere them, but only because their peer groups
also find it necessary to do so.

Kohlberg wrote that most leave stage three reasoning by the time the
reach adulthood, but there is a substantial minority which does not
progress beyond that. Obviously, the social environment in which these
people interact is going to matter a great deal to these people, and
will have a huge impact upon their beliefs of what "right" and "wrong"
are. For instance, take the sudden acceptance of gay rights in
society. Over a long period of time, norms changed so that eventually
norms called out for acceptance of their dignity as people; once norms
changed, many people swung from uniform opposition to uniform support
en masse. While norms take a long time to change, "stage three" people
take their cues from social cues, and those can change very
quickly. Likewise, it took a very short period of time for people to
stop espousing openly racist views. These examples indicate that
social pressure, not norms, is the most important element of moral
behavior for a large number of people.

Those in "stage two" are more troublesome, and fortunately, far
fewer. This is the moral development stage of the criminal, the
narcissist, the sociopath or the macheavellian. Not only are these
individuals unlikely to understand abstract ethical concepts, they
have trouble with even normative concepts. In short, they still have
an extremely fuzzy grasp on right and wrong, to the point that they
are unable to view normative laws except through their own veiwpoint;
e.g. laws exist to serve those who made the laws and no other
reason. Fuzzy notions like "equality before the law" simply do not
exist to such people; laws consist of nothing but arbitrary
rules. Often such people are power-hungry, being that they have
figured out that being able to make laws is the closest they can get
to being above the law. Not only are laws an inconvenience, other
people with whom they have no relationships are equally an
inconvenience. Like the Sopranos, the fictional mafia family, they are
capable of ethical behavior around those with an established
relationship, but only in so far as it serves their own interest to do
so. They may understand the moral behavior of their "level three"
friends, but primarily in the context of a group loyalty that benefits
the members over those outside of the group.

For both the "level 2s and level 3s," a racist worldview may be
appealing. However, they are appealing for different reasons. For a
"stage three" member, morality is set by their social community. If
the norms of the society are racist, they are going to go along with
it. Indeed, if they view themselves and their friends as benefitting
from a racist policy,
they will milk it for all it's worth. Meanwhile, if racism is
condemned, they will be quiet. They may indeed hold racist views for
other reasons, but will not say anything. In public, they will
certainly not admit anything that will betray racism. Privately, they
may still hold racist views, and eagerly commiserate with others over
imagined violations of their rights by the "woke" left.

Meanwhile, let's look at a white person arrested in "stage two"
morality. For them, the situation is far more clear. In all
likelihood, they will hold racist beliefs. Indeed, it is unlikely they
would _not_ be racist. Why? Because they view all moral decisions as
entirely transactional. A white person is very unlikely to need
something from a minority - those in power are generally white, like
them. Black people are usually not useful to them, but whites, having
more power and resources, and are to be preferred.

Indeed, for morally arrested whites, it is in their self interest not
only to practice racism, but to spread it. Since for such people, all
morality is tranactional, racialism is one more way of enforcing
reciprocity - offer your white buddies something simply for being
white, and you will win friendship based on that. The goal is to
elevate one's position, at least a little bit. Meanwhile, for white
stage three folk, who are used to seeing things in terms of their peer
group, if they do not consider any black friends as their peers, they
will certainly see no need to do anything; indeed, if their peers are
racist they will happily go along with it. And if their boss asks them
to carry out racist acts, don't expect them to fight it.

Given that such people are a significant minority in society, they
will tend to produce a significant drag on the social movements for
equality. At worst, they will form the hardened core of an organized
racist opposition.

------------------------

If this model of racist moral behavior is true, then it leads to a
different way of viewing the cause of racism, as well as different
mechanisms for combating racism.

To this point, racism has been seen a problem of education or lack of
awareness. For various reasons, society has not wished to regard
racist behavior as indicative of moral flaws. It is viewed as one part
of the person, which should not define them. But is that really true?
How do they treat people with whom they do not have regular
relationships? Are they angels around everyone, or just those they are
close to or need things from?

Focusing on education and awareness has some strong points. By
recognizing that everyone can do something, this has the noble effect
of making sure everyone can contribute toward this effort through
their own interactions. If "we are all racist," that is empowering, in
the sense that we can do something under our own control. The focus on
"microagressions" ensures that we can ensure we don't do things that
will cause us to unknowingly distance others. And focus on things like
race amity allows people to come together and ensure that those of us
who can do something about racism are doing something.

Another is to make sure such education is listened to. People are
willing to admit others are more educated, knowedgeable or
intelligent; they are decidedly not willing to admit others are more
moral. By focusing this as a problem of education rather than moral
development, it gives others the space to develop. Even this is
difficult; people generally don't like to admit they are less aware or
ignorant. But it's certainly easier for people to admit than admitting
they are less moral.

Unfortunately, this has a significant downside. By failing to treat
this as problem of moral development and moral norm enforcement, it
badly constricts the scope of available remedies. Look at areas in
which minorities truly suffer, things like abuse by law enforcement,
unequal treatment in the financial industry, real estate practices
like redlining and steering, unequal funding of school systems. These
organized practices hardly seem like the activites of people working
out of ignorance. Contrasted to thes institutional practice, activites
like education for awareness of microagressions seem like small
potatoes - essentially, improved social skills for those who are
otherwise unable to fight institutional racism.

When we review practices of institutional racism, the obvious question
is why such practices thrive when so many whites have accepted their
wrongness. Unfortunately, all it takes for these practices to be
entrenched is for the minority of whites with racialist beliefs to
become entrenched in positions of power. The stamp of those bearing
"level two" and "level three" preconventional morality is all over
these practices. Perpetuation of the more harmful forms of
institutional racism are not the province of most people; not even
those of those practicing the unchallenging conventional morality of
"level four" morality, would uphold this - and such people comprise
the plurality of all adults. The problem, instead, is the improper
placement of people of poor ethical development into positions of
power.

Now, it may be possible that in areas where racism is still endemic
insociety, so endemic as to be written into the code of law, that the
"level four" normies actually contribute to racist behavior. This was
certainly the case in Jim Crow south. But everywhere nowadays, the
"shoulds" of society prevent this from taking place, which is why
racist laws tend to be propagated at the margins and under very
misleading pretenses - things like "three strikes" laws, differential
enforcement of drug laws and efforts to curtail voting right; areas
where one has to be a political junkie, relative to one's peers, to
spot what is going on.

No, the bulk of the reason for institutional racism is the fact that
unethical people are everywhere. Many, if not most of them, will be
racist because it helps them or their family. And many of them will be
in positions where they can maintain or expand policies of
institutional racism.

------------------------------------------------

Unfortunately, I'm not aware of any sort of hard numbers itself posits
some general qualitative breakdowns. Kohlberg's workis the only one to attempt
such a breakdown, and I'm not aware of any more detailed follow-on
work. From his work, we know a small minority of
people (in the single percentages) spend their whole lives 
in "stage two"; such people tend to line
up with "dark triad" pathologies, a more recently identified concept that 
has seen a lot more study. We also know that most
people reach "stage four" normative behavior by some time after high
school, but a significant number do not move past "stage three."
Meanwhile, only a small minority minority reach the postconventional
morality of "stage five," or beyond, so few that Kohlberg himself had
trouble getting statistically reliable sample sizes.

If this qualitative breakdown is true, and if it is the case that
"stage two" and "stage three" social actors are operationally racists
in their actions, then this is a troubling dynamic for racial
progress. Those that tend to actively fight racism operate at the
level of postconventional morality, but this is a minority compared to
the larger, less developed group. While the conventional moralists
will listen to them, those less-developed will not. If nothing is to
be done, then the balance of these two forces will result in a slow,
inexorable drag toward a racist society.

What, then, is the solution?

One is to improve moral education of people; essentially, move the
"stage three" members of sciety up to "stage four" where
possible. Another is to strengthen antiracist norms univerally, to
ensure that even those stuck in "stage three" behave if only to fit in
to their own peer group. However, equally important and overlooked is
the need to protect minorities from racism. It seems that of these
three things, only the second one, social pressure, is in use. This
may be why there are so many complaints about "PC police". Of these
three pressure points, peer pressure is perhaps the least effective at
regulating behavior, but without any overt acknowledgement of the need
for continued moral development throughout one's life or overt
acknowledgement of institutional racism, peer pressure is all one is
left with.

If there is a problem with "PC" culture, it is that it may be overused
- it is the only tool for change that concerned individuals have at
their disposal. The other two areas of higher leverage may be more
important, but are harder. Protection of minorities is the only
significant action that can take place in the near
term. Unfortunately, this is dependend upon political power, something
that cannot be guaranteed indefinitely as long as large segments
underlying society is in thrall to racist beliefs. The only solution
is a committment to a culture in which moral development is seen as an
imperitive throughout one's lifetime.

