---
title: About Those Baha'i "Insider" Sites
---

# About Those Baha'i "Insider" Sites

A personal reflection on something I spotted a few years ago. At first
it irritated me. Then I wondered about the source. After some
reflection, I felt I needed to put it on paper.

I have been a Baha'i since the mid-nineties. And the internet around
has been around since the mid-nineties. Coincidence? Well, absolutely!
The two have nothing to do with one another. But I have watched both
of them over the past twenty five years. From the point of view of
growth, at least in the United States, the internet is clearly more
successful; however, from the point of view of spreading the truth, the
opposite is the case.

I'll start this post with a long story. The story seems to be about
the Baha'i Faith, but really is about the internet.

Around the time of the commercialization in the internet, there was
something of a crisis in the Baha'i academic community. The timing, as
it happened was a coincidence - it seems to have had its roots in some
events that happened in the late eighties. If you google it (and I
recommend not doing so, fairly depressing stuff), the central problem
was the culmination of efforts by a handful of academics that at first
blush seemed reasonable. Their problem was a typical one for religious
scholars of a more secular-leaning inclination than their fellow
believers. In particular, they wanted the freedom to cast the Baha'i
Faith in a more secular mode, in conformance with what they felt was
modern ideas. For instance, one particular writer speculated that
Baha'u'llah, our central figure as someone who came to a decision to
declare a revelation from God as an expedience to allow him to lead
the Babi movement to a greater good, rather than due to a sudden
series of revelations from God. However, this person wanted to do this while
staying identifieed as Baha'is in good standing. For other academics,
they found the institutions of the Baha'i Faith not to be in
conformance with the democratic norms of governance they were used to,
and wanted to "reform" its governance in a number of ways. Some of it
was related to the first point, in that one reason they wanted to
reform governance was they desired to academically publish their works
of Baha'i analysis that fell well outside Baha'i thought, while still
identifid as Baha'is.

Naturally, Baha'i governing institutions did not approve of this -
indeed, the charge that Baha'u'llah never really received a revelation
from God and was just a westernizing reformer was identical to claims
that muslim opponents to the Baha'i Faith had been leveling against
the Faith for over a century. The Baha'i Faith is obscure enough that
works by a prominent academic are likely to be taken as gospel by the
outside world, whether or not it reflected actual beliefs.  And in
either the matter of publications or changes to the governing
structure, the masses of Baha'is were not ready to sign off their
assent of either of these points; besides, in no way were they
consulted through the usual channels. Baha'is generally liked their
governing mechanisms, respected their authorities, and probably
would've wondered out loud at someone who claimed to be a Baha'i yet
had such a materialistic views of their central figure. Eventually the
whole thing blew up when it was found that a number of people
(including several academics outside the Baha'i Faith) were
coordinating these messages. The upshot is it gave every appearance to
Baha'i institutions that this was an orchestrated campaign from
outside. The final result was a number of these academics leaving in a
huff.

This is what I was able to puzzle out, but for most Baha'is the matter
remains obscure, if they even remember it. Some old-timer Baha'is,
when pressed, may vaguely remember these controversies, but will
presume it was "Covenant-breakers" that caused the issue. A "covenant
breaker" is a Baha'i splinter group, generally founded by someone who
said God told them to take leadership of the Baha'i Faith, bypassing
both ignoring our elected process and lack of individual authority;
such groups are tiny, but tales of them have circulated as urban myths
for decates.  The more informed Baha'is eventually learned a handful
of details - basically, that some academics well-known within the
Baha'i Faith had terminated their association, but knowing nothing
more than that. For some Baha'is, this posed a challenge, as many of
these were well-respected writers who were not shy to vent their
unhappiness on the internet; meanwhile, the communications from the
Baha'i institutions of governance were necessarily circumscribed
because communications were bound by confidentiality. Any
Baha'is not involved were put in the position of having to trust that
the institutions did the right thing.

If the Baha'i physical community was relatively undisturbed by all of this,
certain corners of the internet were anything but. Back then, in the
pre-Reddit days, most of this action took place on unmoderated boards
like alt.bahai. The end result proved a nasty setback for what is a
very small scholarly community, but otherwise hardly impacted the
community in the long term. For the most part, Baha'is didn't seem
that troubled; they knew the Baha'is involved in the administrative
side, or at least knew people who knew them. After all, the Baha'i
administrators were usually people well-known within the community who
had been put in those positions of authority precisely because 
they were already well-known pillars
within the community; they were not some invisible curarae plotting
behind the scenes to control the Baha'i Faith. My impression is the
field of Baha'i studies has basically recovered to the state it was
once in, in spite of having entered a dark patch for over a decade.

So an unimportant tale, right? I'll get to it below.

-----------------------------

Of course, this is The Internet, and the name of the game is Fake
News. It is easy to dredge all sorts of stuff up, and this incident
has become legendary in the a certain subset of "disaster porn" web
pages with names like "Insider Baha'i" and "Baha'i Rants" that discuss
problems with the Baha'i Faith and how it is all a sham and its
membership roles are now collapsing. Since the mid-nineties with the birth
of the commercial internet, there have been Baha'i web pages. And much
less polished looking ones, mostly Christian in nature, attacking the
Baha'i faith. And recently, certain "insider" web pages making many of
these same attacks, without the Chrisitian appeals to doctrine and The
Bible. In the telling of these websites, "the mask is now off," and
the academic brouhaha in the nineties was the precipitating event of
a collapse of the entire movement.

Is there a crisis? Hardly. But it is worth noting that the current
membership situation is a test to some of the weaker Baha'is. Since the
mid-nineties, the Baha'i Faith has settled into a sort of static
steady-state with regard to membership in the US and Europe. The
result has been a set of plans that has greatly expanded both growth
and maturity of the membership in the developing world, 
while barely moving the needle in
places like the US. Baha'is tend to come up with all sorts of fanciful
explanations for these things, but the actual explanation is as simple
as it is boring: the Baby Boomers, when they came of age, simply
flooded the Baha'i Faith with new adherents.  They also greatly
expanded the ranks of Moonies, Scientologists, Hare Krishnas, Sri
Chinmoy followers, Nichiren Buddhists, EST adherents, and a variety of
other lesser-known spiritualists causes and quasi-cults. For all of
the new religious movements, the result was a bonanza of new
believers. The Baha'i Faith, in maintaining reasonably static
membership since these glory days, has actually managed to pull
of quite a feat of staying static, as
compared to both the other new religious movements and some mainline
churches. The stall in growth has, however, posed a
challenge for two decades to many Baha'is used to ever-bigger events
and yearly growth in the double-digits or high single digits. It has
post particular problems in rural America and the Northeast
where there has been a decline, as a little-c conservatisim in
religious matters and creeping secularism means even less interest in
spiritual development than elsewhere in the US.

If the Baha'i Faith is doing well (or at least, no worse than before),
then what is the reason for these web pages? Who publishes these web
pages? Are they these same academics? It hardly seems likely, given
the nature of their objections are not reflected in the websites
themselves. And it's been an unreasonably long time - over twenty
years. Those same academics have their own websites - most of them
still have their own unauthorized translations, which Baha'is
themselves are free to make use of. So where do these websites come
from?

I've viewed several of these "uncensored" sites, and have been stricken by
how polished and organized some of these are. If it were a personal
blog, we'd see far fewer updates; at most, no more than several a
month. Blogs take time; I consider myself a decent writer and the only
way I can do more than a column a week is if I spend hours on this
every day revising and editing. And look at the formatting - it's
simple and crummy, and it has everything to do with the lack of
time. You see what you have before you? THIS is a personal
website. The only reason it isn't spammed with Google adword ads is
because I know how to post this on GitHub, which doesn't have ads;
otherwise, it would be just as bad as the rest. I've followed many
Baha'i blogs in my day. Some are plainly well organized and funded
like [this](www.bahaithoughts.org) and [this](www.bahaiblog.org), but
for the most part, they look like this, get updated maybe every other
month, and the author usually gives up after a year or two; five if
they're really persistent.

Not these so-called "dissident" websites! Some of these websites
post as frequently as _daily_. And plainly, someone is putting some
money into it - there is not an ad in sight. These people thought
well enough of it not only to pay for their wordpress theme, but have
all the ads removed, pay for their own DNS name... the works! Indeed,
some appear so high up in the page rankings that it seems evident they
have done at least as much work on search engine optimization -
sometimes footing for the paid ad designation to raise their results.

People, no individual has that sort of time and money, let alone
animus. These are not "concerned Baha'is." They are not individuals
speaking from the heart. I've known people who became alienated and
left the Baha'i Faith, they may have held a strong animus years after,
but they don't expend this amount of effort. And I've known people who
were unhappy but stayed. They certainly don't pose as "insiders" and
trash the the Baha'i Faith publicly; there are too many opportunities
do that in established Baha'i forums where sometimes (surprise) their
objections even lead to action by the community. Indeed, I have even
viewed the blogs of some of the former Baha'i academics involved from
the controversies, and they may have a small little section where they
cater to controversy and perhaps salve any remaining bitterness they
have, but for the most part, these are people who have moved on.

Nor are their complaints of these websites coherent in any way. In one
post, we are horrible to the LGBT community; in another post, we are
far too accomodating to them and "secular" in outlook. In one, we are
estranged from all liberal orientations and right-thinking people; in
another, we are pawns of the Democratic party who flaunt our partisan
leanings. One post attempts to trash a publicly known Baha'i with
hearsay; another accusses the Baha'is of engaging in backbiting
against "heroic dissidents." If there is any coherent picture, it is
to paint the Faith in a negative light to whomever may come across,
and if one attack won't do it, perhaps another one will.

The question, therefore, is who would do this, if not Baha'i
dissidents.  There are, in fact, what those in the Baha'i Faith refer
to as "covenant breakers" - splinter movements in the Baha'i Faith
whose leaders claim to be _the real_ Baha'i Faith. Academics estimate
fewer than one thousand in the US. While they too have seem extremely
restricted growth, these sects will occasionally pay to elevate their
web pages in search rankings, occasionally hiding the nature of who is
hosting the website. The hope of these movements is to peel of
disgruntled Baha'is. It is possible they are behind some of this;
their small numbers mean that their main source of community is over
the internet. But if those Covenent Breaker movements are the source
of these web pages, why don't these websites have a link to their own
websites? Advertising their own communities, their own events? Unlike
former Baha'is, these are people who are quite eager to pull people
from the Baha'i community; they have the time and inclination. Yet it
obviously isn't them.

You may think, rightly, "Surely thou dost protest too much. Why so
defensive?" Perhaps you think that these websites are at least
informative, are they not?  Why censor this information? Doesn't the
rest of the community have a right to know? Doesn't the world at large
need to know? Isn't this of service, even if it may be wrong or
biased? To which I would replay that where it is truthful, it is
exaggerated, and where it is untruthful, it is harmful. Indeed, those
issues that are of concern are under discussion in our interal
meetings all the time. What is not representative is that in our
internal meetings we actually _work on these problems and solve
them_. We don't sit around and complain and blame the leadership; the
leadership is, well, us. Certainly, some of the complaints ring true -
somebody spent a lot of time cribbing these old quotes from forums
like the old alt.bahai. But Baha'is generally give vent in our actual
governance stuctures, where we can actually have issues addressed.

One may say that the official organs of the Baha'i Faith give to sunny
a view of the Baha'i Faith, and that is true. One would expect no
less. To actually know what it's like, you actually have to go to a
meeting. But likewise, this websites are not an unvarnished view of
the faith, much as they claim to be. The purpose is present an
inaccurately dark view of the religion, using as much
realistic-looking information as possible to pass it off as the real
thing.

----------------------

Ockham's law says that these websites, far from being run by
"concerned Baha'is," are almost certainly paid endeavors of
traditional religious opponents. While it would seem the Baha'i Faith
would be both too small and too harmless to attract enemies,
I can think of two movements that would traffic in this sort of
thing.

One immediate candidate comes to mind from my six years in Texas.  The
majority religion in Texas is Evangelical "Glad You're One of Us, and
If You Aren't Yet, You Soon Will Be" Christians. They are a friendly
lot, particularly if you aren't yet a Christian. Thanks to the low
cost of living, there are pleny of people whose less-demanding job
leaves them plenty of time for hobbies, and if you are a religious
believer who isn't yet Christian, you are an interesting, compelling
project that is a worthy recipient of their energy and spare time.

As far as their attitude toward the Baha'i Faith, Buddhism, or any
un-American werdness: in every Christian bookstore is a "comparative
religions" section. It's off in the corner. You'll have the books
dedicated to Judaism and various paens to their "role" in history,
that seem to skip over the entire religion as it is actually
praticed. You'll also see some discussing the MuslimTerrorist religion. But
normally, there are a few comparative religion books. These books are all
written in the style of a book called _The History of the New York
Yankees (as Told by a Red Sox Fan)._

What stands out about these books is not their poor, tenditious
research; or the fact they are obviously made for Christians, not
those who believe in said religions, or even those of a sympathetic
viewpoint. Nor are they made even for the money; it is hard to imagine
that these even sell out their print runs. No, it is meant to comfort
existing Christians, and let them know just how wrong those other
religions are. Some series are oddly encyclopedic; I recall seeing one
series that had books targeting Baha'is, Buddhists, Jehova's
Witnesses, Mormons, Muslims, and (wait for it...) Unitarians. But
these aren't loner operations; usually there are religious foundations
that help fund the effort, and probably have no problem subsidizing
the publications at a modest loss.

There is a minority of evangelical Christians who clearly find other
faiths not simply wrong, but offensive. Certainly not all - some of
the strongest Evangelicals I've met gave my Baha'i Faith a surprising
amount of respect, particularly when the found I'd converted in spite
of certain difficulties it caused. But there is a minority that are
clearly uncomfortable with the actual existence of religious
diversity, showing their displeasure only in the polling booth and at
relatives who dare to step out of line. And for a smaller minority of
these, stamping out these other belief systems is an Act of Faith. Such
people view mankind as having three religions - Christianity,
Judiasim, and Paganism. The Jews are simply Christians who haven't
"come home yet"; Pagans, on the other hand believe Pure Evil. In its
worst form, this belief system allows themselves license to practice
forms of "othering" that makes opposition of any form acceptable,
right up to actual violence.

My guess is this is one source of these "insider" websites. The goal
is to make sure that the Baha'i Faith is unacceptable to those who
would otherwise be interested, and the contents, consisting of a mix
of rumors and actual comments culled from other (possibly very old)
archives, is meant to look authoritative enough to pass of as actual
dissident content. Their provenance is probably why the blog posts are
so confused and inconsistent in alternating praise and condemnation of
"liberal" values, as the writers seem just as confused by left-leaning
politics as they are about actual Baha'i doctrinal beliefs. Is posing
as an insider and posting rumor dishonest? Well, yes, but to a certain
set of believers, this is war, and nobody is actually hurt. Plus, they
aren't really lying, just _passing along information_...

But it is a mistake to think of Evangelical Christianity to be unique.
History itself is evidence is enough to point to the evangelizers of
other religions. For one hundred fifty years, the Baha'i community in
Iran has put up with this sort of nonsense; not only overt
governmeent-sanctioned disrcrimination and condemnation from the
mullahs who run the government, but lay organizations even more
dedicated to discrediting the Baha'i Faith. The Iranians Baha'is I
knew in the nineties remembered the days before the revolution when
the Baha'i Faith could meet openly - they even had a huge community
center in Tehran. They had plenty of experience with these anti-Baha'i
activists pulling nonsense like posing as unhappy believers or
disrupting open public meetings. One time in Austin I was hosting a
public meeting for our Baha'i group when a guest (an evangelical, who
may or may not have been sincere in his faith) invited a lay
preachers, who proceeded to repeat recycled unfounded accusations
against the Baha'i Faith for an hour. After a half-hour I thought
"boring, let's shut it down," but as I was rolling my eyes during a
tirade directed at a rather opinionated Baha'i, one of these Iranians
nudged me and told me something to this effect: "Let him keep going,
he'll run out of words. This is _nothing_ compared to what we had to
put up with in Tehran."

Indeed, the attitude of worst Christian Evangelicals is positively
sunny and welcoming compared to the Muslim clergy towards Baha'is,
particularly in the Baha'i homeland of Iran. During the nineteenth and
twentieth century, there were actual pogroms directed at Baha'i
communities; there were well-known Anti-Baha'i radio programs carrying
lectures of prominent Muslim critics, their equivalent of Father
Coughlin's radio programs. During the reign of the Shah, secular
authorities looked the other way, but after the revolution, it became
state policy. Indeed, there were [secret documents laying out plans
for the undercover extirpation of the Baha'i Faith](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2018-01-30/iran-s-secret-shunning-of-a-minority-faith). And this certainly didn't
stop with the internet; if anything, [Iran has been using the internet
surreptitiously to achieve its own
agendas](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/democracy-post/wp/2018/08/23/it-turns-out-russia-isnt-the-only-country-turning-facebook-and-twitter-against-us/?noredirect=on&utm_term=.e4b5c29f7616). I
have little doubt it about it's willingness to [use the internet to hurt its enemies or mislead US citizens](https://slate.com/technology/2018/10/iranian-facebook-trolls-impersonating-americans-midterms.html)

Put it this way: knowing what we know about both religious fanatics
within this country and the willingness of Iran to target the Baha'i
Faith outside of its own country, it is inconceivable that both of
these would _not_ be engaged in this sort of information warfare
against both the Baha'i Faith. And let's be clear, they'll target all
sorts of others they view as enemies; we think we're special, but we
aren't _that_ special. Neither of these groups can be counted on to
spend a lot of time actually understanding The Baha'i Faith itself,
but both of them probably have enough self-awareness to know that
attacks from their own religious points of view are likely to be
ineffective. So the likeliest form of any attack would be a website
posing as some sort of "insider" website where they would recycle old
accusations on alt.bahai and press releases against secular enemies of
the Baha'i Faith.

------------------------------------------

What's to be done about it? Actually, nothing. This explanation is all
I intend to do. I find them to be an irritant, but easily
ignored. Where they are false, it's easy to disprove their
claims. Where they are true, I have seen no issue raised that is not
being discussed in other communities, or that other Baha'i communities
have not already found effective solutions for. The slackening of
growth in the community is no more mystefying than the same slackening
of growth in civic organizations across the country (I'll stick
an obligatory reference to _Bowling Alone_ here). The lack of growth
certainly isn't due to underground web pages claiming to tell "the
real story" about The Faith. My main concern, of course, is that
others who are less informed about The Baha'i Faith will be misled;
certainly, anyone with any interest in the Baha'i Faith is going to do
a quick search on the internet, and given the modest amount of polish
on some of these sites, it may put off some of the more credible
people; let's face it, there are still many people who will believe
whatever they read on the internet.

And about Karma? It isn't a Baha'i law, but believe it is a law. One
of Shoghi Effendi's major works was a history of the first 100 years
of the Baha'i Faith titled _God Passes By_. The reference in the title
is actually a little obscure. My first guess is that it was an
allusion to the Baha'i Faith's claim that another messenger from God
has come again; e.g. he is "passing by" our world. In fact, it's a
reference to passover, and a form of "spiritual karma". Shoghi Effendi
researched this during World War II, a conflict in which the central
participant, the Nazi Party of Germany, was literally a nullification
of everything the Baha'i Faith stood for; having wiped out The Baha'i
Faith in Germany, it was now losing a war completely of its own
making. Shoghi Effendi noted that during the course of The Baha'i
Faith's history, The Baha'i Faith, in spite of setbacks, continued to
slowly grow (please recall it was _much_ smaller in those years than
it is today). The enemies of the Baha'i Faith, on the other hand, all
came to ignominous ends.

Those who spread disorder, traffic in rumor and commit information
warfare on the internet are legion. What is inconceivable is that
those who believe themselves to be favored by God would feel the need
to traffic in this sort of thing. Yet I have no doubt some of them
do. Let us look at these movements. Are they not addicted to power?
What does it say about a movement who claims to follow the path of
Muhommad when the governments they control, far from being embodiments
of justice, instead consistently grace international lists of "state
sponsors of terrorism" and "worst respect for civil liberties"? What
does it say about a movement claiming to bring the love of Christ
everywhere that it consistently foists upon the United States
politicians who cater to racialist views and foment xenophobia in
their bids to cling to power?  I do not pretend to claim the
organizations in The Baha'i Faith are perfect; they are, after all,
made up of people, and people are decidedly less than perfect. But the
Baha'i Faith has very few natural enemies, and is too small and
quietist to even attract notice from those who would oppose its
aims. If an organization chooses to train its fire on the Baha'i
Faith, it says more about them than the Baha'i Faith. And I have no
doubt that their moral bankruptcy will in the end doom them to ignomy.

So to all: there is not an underground movement of dissidents, who are
afraid to attach their name to their blogs out of shunning and
threats. Are there dissidents? Yes, and they have no trouble attaching
their names to their comments; nor are they legion. As far as people
have an axe to grid, it tends not to be at small religious
organization given to political quietism. There is no conspiracy,
no movement to cover up the nature of the community. What there is, is
the internet. And the internet is a mix of good and cesspool; a
collective commons that reflects the best and worst in humanity. A lot
of good people who are busy contributing, and a fair bit of bad people
eager to use what money and power they have to make the world a worse
place to suit their convenience. Read wisely.
