---
title: When Religion Becomes a Cargo Cult
---

# When Religion Becomes a Cargo Cult

### And How to Move Beyond It

One problem with being an obscure blogger is lack of motivation. In my
case, I write to satisfy an urge that would otherwise result in me
rambling and boring people with thoughts of no importance to them. But
I also write to eventually be good enough to be worth reading. To that
extent, my preferred reading are the serious blogs - the internet
equivalent of "long form journalism" - and that in itself is
demotivating. Generally I read stuff I cannot hope to ever achieve the
quality of - the ideas are good, and the best I can ever do is hope to
rip them off for my own benefit.

To this extent, I'm actually just going to discuss some ideas from
reading just one (length) blog post: [Update Your Cargo Cult (For the
Win](https://meaningness.blog/metablog/upgrade-your-cago-cult). I
recommend you check it out; it is scientific/philosophical and has
nothing to do with anything I normally write about.

It also has implications for religion. But not in the way you normally
think about things.

First, about the "cargo cult" part. To understand the point of the
article, you have to know what a cargo cult is - he explains it great
in the post. But for those of you who just want a tl;dr, a cargo cult
is a sociologocal phenomenon which was spotted in south Pacific
islands after World War II. The natives on one of the island were
building their own airplane "landing strips" and carrying out
elaborate rituals that looked like the activities of ground crews at
airports. Why? Because they saw airplanes landing during World War II,
and whenever the airplanes landed, they unloaded all this stuff -
food, medicine, goods. Some of which found its way to the natives,
since the Americans needed to buy the goodwill of the natives whose
homes they were using as a staging area. These pseudo-aeronautical
activites wound up ossifying into a religious practice - hence the
term "cargo cult" was born.

The point of the blog post was actually to discuss someone else's
writings (so yes, you're reading an actual thirdhand account). The
great physicist Richard Feynman was one of the few who were great
popular writers, and he had no trouble explaining his insights in a
relatable way. And one of his insights was: bad science has the
quality of a cargo cult. Think about it: You can publish papers. You
can get government grants. You can staff up a lab full of graduate
students. You can study papers, redo experiments, and do all the
activities that look like doing science. You can do all these
things, and yet if there is no deep understanding, you will never
actual discover anything - which is the point of science. You will
have perfected a "cargo cult science" - carrying out the all the
motions without ever understanding the point of it. And never once
getting a cargo delivery.

Even if you only have a modest interest in science, the blog post is a
good read; he uses it to explain things like the well-known
replication crisis within science, the popularity of p-hacking, and
the reason nutrition science never seems to make any progress. While
I'm interested in these insights, I'm more interested in the fact that
there are lots of other activities that have this quality.

One thing that occurs to me is that you can have a religion become a
cargo cult. At which point my scientific readers will point and laugh
and say "that's because religions are nothing but cults anyway,
there's no difference." And I will retort that their insight is borne
of gross ignorance. Aside from actual primitive religions, no religion
has much in common with cargo cults. Even the most casual reader of
anthropology realizes that primitive spirituality is far removed from
the desparate superstitions that resulted in actual cargo cults.

Yet the _syndrome_ of cargo cults are everywhere. Think, for instance,
of your professional field or trade. Do you know co-workers who were
trained to do one thing without thinking it through? Do they go
through the same motions, whether or not they even work? Do they even
know why they're doing it? Do they do the same things, when the
context makes those same actions wasteful or just plain wrong? From
that point of view, any goal-oriented activity can turn into a cargo
cult, if you mistake the ceremony that is associated with an activity
from the activity itself.

This is subtle enough to creep into any field of endeavor - there's
areason you can find "cargo cult" behavior in science, business,
training, manufacturing.  It's because you starts their career or
trade _being in a cargo cult_.

Any beginner starts by learning how to do things and repeating what he
has been taught. Indeed, mastery is often outlined in this manner:
1. You first learn by imitiation
2. You then become an expert
3. You then learn what is behind what you learned through imitation
4. And finally, you have to forget what you learned in step 1.

Let's go to my workplace. I'm a software developer. Most software
development, nowadays, is managed through a process known as "Agile
Development." The cargo cult aspects of it are legendary:

* Every day, in the morning, you start by having something called a
  "stand up" meeting (you _have_ to stand), where you report on
  certain issues and give a progress report.

* All of your work is subdivided into "sprints" - usually around two
  weeks. All projects must be done within a sprint, and ideally
  complete within that sprint. Larger projects must be done inside
  individual sprints.

* You frequently have someone called a "scrum master" who manages all
  this - usually someone who is not the manager. They must do other
  things as part of their job, such as ensure retrospective meetings
  are done to postmortem every sprint, and ensure tasks are properly
  defined to be acted on during the sprint. Not infrequently, the
  scrum master is trained in all other sorts of processes that must be
  imposed on the organization to make it "more agile."

And I could go on. You could see how something like this very easily
becomes of a nature becoming a cargo cult. Scrum masters, who are
intentionally not from management, frequently cling onto their
newfound authority like a lamprey on an overfed host, making everyone
else feel like they have two bosses. Initiatives that don't easily fit
into sprint cycles are sawed up in small nonsensical projects or even
abandoned.  People involved in multiple initiatives wind up in
multiple daily scrums, in some cases spending much of their morning in
these meetings. Books on how to "do agile" are purchased and thrust
upon hapless engineers, lest they do it all wrong. The books don't
agree, but since they are entirely prescriptive, there is no way of
telling which is right. And when it doesn't work (and frequently it
doesn't), a highly paid ~~high priest~~ consultant comes in and tells them
what they're doing wrong.

Of course, the problem is the "cargo cult," not agile itself. After
doing things for a year or two, most people with some management
sense and some curiousity will find out exactly the reason for these
rituals. The daily stand-up was to keep people who work with each
other (and only those people) clued into what everyone was doing. The
sprints were intended to ensure that initiatives weren't underdesigned
and didn't run into months without visible progress. The scrum master
was invented so that people had someone they could report problems to
without management, since so many in management think wrongly that
their job is to  "hold people accountable," not solve their employees
problems. I've been a scrum master off-and-on for nearly ten years
now, and it's actually been one or two years since I've seen problems with
the process in anyone else's department, let alone my own.

But I still hear stories of some companies where it's still a cargo
cult - done without understanding, it does more harm than
good, wasting engineers' time on questionable ceremonies.

----------------------

And of course, religious actity itself can cause that religion to turn
into a cargo cult.

In some cases, this is so obvious that it goes without saying. Stories
of the ancients praying to Jehovah to smite their enemies get
translated into the same sort of activities in the present, as fevered
followers sublimate their frustration into passive-agressive prayers
for relief from cultural enemies real and imagined. Activities meant
to recruit and unite religious communities are periodically replicated
from retellings of the the stories of the early founders, forgetting
that such activities were probably dropped for good reasons and many
of these activities are now ineffective or even awkward. Let's take
some examples from Christianity, which is in no ways unique in that
respect. Think of the obstreporous street preacher yelling on the
subway car, who no doubt think they are following in the footsteps of
the early disciples - do they honestly think that there is even one
person within earshot who hasn't heard about Jesus in their life?
Because that's what the apostles were dealing with. What about the
whole argument of "whole immersion" baptism, when even the fragmentary
records we have of that indicates the practice is totally symbolic
anyway? Controversies over when the Sabbath is practiced?  Of course,
in some cases, a religious community sometimes makes a virtue out of
necessity. Note how the elaborate Mosaic rituals and dietary
restrictions of the Jewish faith, no doubt originally invented for
very real reasons of rudimentary sanitation in primitive societies,
have been preserved as a token of heritage, displaying a public
signifier of group membership and commitment.

But let's aside the above concerns. The worst that can happen from
such behavior is for our co-religionists to exhibit behavior so
foolish we are embarassed on their behalf. But rest assured those who
are ill-disposed to our religious beliefs would still be ill-disposed
even without such incidents to amuse them. The problem comes when
cargo cult behavior is picked up, even as we are seeking to be
effective. The problem there isn't foolishness, but wasting our time
and failing to take advantage of opportunities given us.

Religions are cultural and social entities. Each religion has its own
unique mandate, but there are commonalities. On an individual level,
it is both supposed to make us more moral people and draw us closer to
Godhead (or whatever we choose to call it), and on a sociaal level,
it's supposed to draw us closer to others and bind us in a community
that helps us in these endeavors, and perhaps trains are children in
these same ways. Toward this end, we have the elaborate diversity of
churches, temples and mosques, along with their associated community
centers and charitable organizations. The entire purpose of all of
these is ostensibly to support these aims.

Cargo cult religion can sneak in wherever people do things without
understanding. Feynman's cited article described this as a risk
whenever we engage in an activity without brutal absolute honesty. In
science, the purpose must be to achieve understanding and truth, and
this purpose should never be mistaken for the individual goals we set
for ourselves, such as getting enough published papers to make
professor, or making sure an expensive experiment we're involved in
finds something that will get us attention. Likewise, cargo cult
behavior can be exhibited whenever we do something without honest
attention to why we are doing this, when we are imitating the forms we
associate success with instead of engaging in true goal-seeking
behavior.

* Is our prayer truly drawing us closer to God/whatever? Or are we
  just praying out of habit? Do we know if it's effective?

* Are our activities within our religious organizations making us
  better people, and the organization more in line with its goals? Or
  are we just continuing something that is felt to have worked in the
  past?

* Are fundraising efforts and the treasure raised used only for
  effective means of spiritual and community improvements? Or does it
  just put more money into nice things people want?

* In our evangelical efforts, are our efforts really to improve
  peoples lives? Or are we just trying to bring more people "into our
  tribe" so we can feel more secure in our place in the community?

* When there are problems in the community, are they handled within
  the community because we want to take responsibility for fixing the
  problems and ensuring everyone learns from them? Or are we doing it
  as a way to "paper over" problems so that everyone continues to look
  good?

When it comes down to it, religions become ineffective as soon as they
exhibit "cargo cult" behaviors - behaviors that are done not because
they are the right thing to do, but because they seem like the right
thing to do _based on actions we've seen other people do_.

The question is, what to do about it. If the pastor is the person
doing the "driving," then that is the person responsible. But that's
rarely where it ends. Most religious organizations aren't driven
solely by a pasto or rabbi, but by the church boards and the various
volunteer organizations that provide the mass of labor and
activity. If they are not properly informed, the organization as a
whole is not either. If laypersons are carrying out activities not
because they are the right thing to do, but because they are simply
what has been done in the past and what they've seen done, then no one
can wonder if stagnation is the result.

The solution should be of interest to any concerned believer, and it
occurs in two spheres - in our personal life, and in the life of the
community. Both are important.

In the personal sphere, this has long been an issue of concern that
has been handled in two different ways - ways that at first, seem
opposite. Both are done through the same way that we move out of the "cargo
cult" mentality professionally.

The first way is through apprenticeship. Working with a teacher, we
learn not only the basics of how to do it, but the subtle points of
practice. This ensures that we achieve an actual benefit from our own
spiritual practices. Many of the oriental traditions are particularly
strong here. For instance, if you are a Buddhist and wish to study
meditation, you will need to work with a teacher. This is felt so
strongly that there isn't really a "canon" of authorized
texts. Buddhism was practiced from the earliest stages
monk-to-monk. There is a weakness to this approach, in that teachers
can be unreliable. But it is preferred to simple rote study, which
could lead to imitation instead of understanding.

The second way is through further study. The occidental revealed
religions are particularly strong in this; the underlying truths of
one's religious practice are set forth in writing that itself is
regarded as infallible, at least in practice if not in
theory. Leading, naturally, to the regard we have for The Bible, The
Koran, The Torah, and so forth as repsoitory for not only religious
belief but behavior. This isn't confined to Abrahmic religions either;
in Sikhism, after a line of hereditary leaders, the final Guru
installed the written cannon as the final, authoritative Guru for all
time. But historically, there was a significant weakness to use of the
written word - most people had no ability to read!  This was confined
to clergy and a small educated class. This meant placing upon clergy
the burden of relaying what is in the writings to the
believers. Historically, the clergy has proven to be a "noisy channel"
in this regard.

Today, thanks to widespread literacy, we need not go with either
approach. The Baha'i Faith itself does have a canonical set of
writings, and indeed regards the written word of its founder as The
Revelation, and the key to religious knowledge. Indeed, Baha'is quite
famously (or notoriously) have no clergy, or no place for clergy. To a
very real extent, this in itself isn't terribly distintive. This is
similar to various "lay organizations" in Christianity.

One question that might be worth posing is how to incorporate personal
guidance in addition to scriptural guidance. As Baha'is, we may insist
we don't need clergy. The problem is - people like to imitate other
people. And people like to thrust themselves into positions of
leadership. This means that even in communities where the bulk of
people are literate, and where there is an avoidance of a clergy, you
still get people looking to imitate "leadership figures" - and people
looking to be those "leadership figures." Hence, the fact that so many
Christian lay organizations are eventually dominated by charismatic
lay preachers. Cargo cultism is wired into many of us.

I might also add an additional point of guidance (yes, I see you in
the back sticking up your hand enthusiastically! I'm getting to your
point right now!). And that point of guidance is - SCIENCE. Science is
the answer to EVERYTHING! Right??

Well, a little problem with science... the science that have been
applied to religious practice has, for the most part, been the very
definition of "cargo cult science."  The studies are there, the papers
are published, and yet... nothing is accomplished. Papers may show
barely-weak correlations, frequently by people wishing to show what
they set out to show, and are trumpeted to true believers back
home. Similar things are done elsewhere, showing the opposite.
Fortunately, there has been some small areas of serious study, mainly
in area of meditation. Significantly, this is the one spiritual
practice that has been adopted by nonreligious people. It's possible
that this has been the critical element for keeping the scientists
honest. But here, you run into a different problem - science is slow!
We know that meditation helps for some limited conditions; we know it
relieves stress; we know it can relieve depression *or make it
worse*. What we don't have is anything approaching a scientifically
proven *praxis* for effectively meditating. Time to go back to the
monks for advice.

Of course, you _can_ choose to be more scientific - in your own
practice. That means actually trying if things work for you. It means
being willing to try things based no more on someone's say so, and giving
it a go - but being unafraid to experiment. Of course, you need to
know what your goal is first. And you need to be willing to walk away
from answers that are the "right" answers or those "seem right." In
religion especially, people feel that since one is unable to fall back
on science or proven answers, they must instead do what is "correct" -
meaning imitating what they see authority figures do, regardless of
whether it works for them. But contrariwise, it is easy do the answer
that "feels write" based on no more than a gut sensation - something
that can be just as misleading.

The key is reflection, honesty, and an ability to improve. This is how
we avoid falling into "cargo cult" practices in our personal religious
practice. The key is to avoid blind imitation (something Baha'is are
repeatedly told), and the key to doing that is to continuing to study,
checking our guidance rather than imitating what others do, viewing
others as teachers but not our lords, and performing experiments on
ourselves.

This wouldn't be complete without a personal story. While it isn't
sufficiently embarassing or ridiculous to be funny, it illustrates the
point. I've been




------------------------------

What about our organized religious life? This is where things get a
little harder.
