>---
title: The Deontological Trap
---

I was amused by [this article I stumbled upon the other day]( ) that
posed that utilitarians were thought of as more moral than
deontoligists but thought of as less desireable by potential
mates. This amused me for two reasons; 1) it confirms what I already
sorta suspected and 2) it seems unmistakeable that a picture of
Chiidi and Eleanor from _The Good Place_ has become the go-to clipart
for any pointy-headed article discussing ethics.

But first - if you don't know what utilitarianism and deontologicalism
is, you're in for a ~~bore~~ treat! I'll set forth more or less what
they are - I'll be general to avoid saying something people can
obviously disagree:

    Utilitilitarian - _you should do what creates the most good for
    society as a whole_.

    Deontologist - _you should do what is your duty_.

These are, roughly, the two largest schools of thought regarding
morality.  Obviously these are more descriptions of mindsets than
actual codes of conduct - one could be a very lax utilitarian and a
strict deontologist, or vice versa. The main importance of the
distinction is the the shift of emphasis it causes. The usual
distinction, and one this particular article brings up explicitly, is
you may have certain duties that may override what might be an obvious
good. So, for instance, as a good husband, it is my duty to ensure my
wife and children are well fed, a duty that overrides my duty to feed
some homeless guy on the street.

In practice, utilitarians and deontologists wind up coming to the same
conclusions, albeit from a different direction. So, for instance,
supposing I decided to leave my wife and run away with Jameela Jamil,
the astoundingly attractive Indian actress on "The Good Place". Both
deontologists and utilitarians would condemn this, but for different
reasons. Deontologists would condemn this as a dereliction to my duty
as a husband to be faithful to my wife. Utilitarians would condemn
this also, but instead by claiming this is bad because it creates a
net negative in happiness for humankind: I would increase my
happiness, but greatly decrease the happiness of my wife, my children,
and Jameela Jamil.

It is said that in popular parlance, utilitarianism
may be the most popular ethics. It's well-understood and intuitive;
it's easily explained in economic terms, which seems to be how
everyone frames discussions around nowadays, and it even comes up in
Spock's Vulcan credo: "The good of the many outweigh the good of the
few." However, in our ordinary life, most of us are deontologists. We have
certain relationships and committments that cause us to place our
loved ones well above and beyond any concern we have for our fellow
man. In our ordinary life, we pay attention to our duties, and do this
in more or less a habitual fashion, never bothering to check whether
or not our actions improve the balance of happiness in the world.

So based on what I've discussed, there are two questions that come to
mind:

1. Why is it people seem to be deontologists in their daily life, even
as they explain moral tradeoffs using utilitarian concepts? And,

2. Why is it that utilitarians are _seen as more moral_ than
deontologists?

(If you don't think question #2 is an appropriate one, go back to the
article I linked to and actually read it. People actually disliked
those that practiced utilitarian ethics because they were seen as too
sacrificing.)

The explanation for #1 is pretty straightforward. I'm doing a bit of
"folk anthropology" here, I can't actually cite studies proving my
point of view. But I imagine the explanation is something like this:

Let's start at the beginning. Early civilization, or even earlier -
hunter gatherer tribes. We know that based on history and
anthropology, early humans lived in a world not of atomic individuals
but of societies, societies built on relationships. Duty was bound to
be one of the central concepts holding societies together. In such a
case, it is easy to conceive of duties - something you have to do to
keep your place in society. The payoff was obvious; in some cases, you
were the beneficiary of duties performed by others. In other cases, it
may not have been any individual, but the tribe in general. In any
case, even if you didn't receive any benefit yourself, by doing your
duty, at least you got to live. The more complex the social unit and
culture, the more elaborate the system of duties spelled out inside
society. By the time of civilizations and the early religions, it
would be hard to tell if it was the religion that was the source of
those duties, or if the religion existed to explain those duties.

Seen in this light, utilitarianism is somewhat unnatural - an
enlightenment-era innovation. To think of humankind as a whole as the
beneficiary of ethical action is far removed from those earlier
concepts of duties. Indeed, there is a good case to be made that not
just utilitarianism but other enlightenment-era moralities were
proposed as correctives for moralities that centered on duties that
were no longer seen as ethical but simply those of coercion: duties of
serfs toward a regent or king, duties of slaves toward a master,
duties of men toward their church.

-----------------------------

Now on to point #2. One side-effect of the study was the presumption
that utilitarians are _seen as_ more moral, even though both
utilitarian and deontological schools are both very well developed,
and generally come to the same conclusions about morals. My assertion
is that most people's intuitions are correct: deontology as practiced
by ordinary people _is typically_ less moral, even though it need not
be. The reason is because of several "moral traps" that people fall
into when practicing deontological ethics. I'll spend most of this
post talking about these traps.

Before my critique, a few words of caution. First, I am not critiquing
any of the serious writings of deontology by philosophers. I have no
business critiquing the thoughts of anyone name-checked on "The Good
Place"; I've hardly read any of them, and those I've read, such as
Nagle, I have immense respect for.  What I'm critiquing is deontology
as it's practiced day-to-day by ordinary people; I wish there were a
separate word for that, but there isn't. Indeed, any deontologist
reading these arguments will assert that I'm attacking a straw man. In
defense of this post, a "straw man" argument is one that argues
against positions that no one has ever actually held. _But my
critiques are about positions I have hear out load all the time
throughout my life._ They're deontologogical positions; they just
happen to be held by the sort of people who have no idea what
"deontology" means. They are instead about the traditional
deontological moral codes of your "ordinary Joe" that that contrarians are so
insistent on defending the necessity for respect of.

What sort of contrarian? Well, one of the more famous contrian framing
of ordinary morality is by Jonathan Haidt in his book [ ](). This book
is a long defense of a thesis that most people who frame ethics in
enlightenment-era ethical frameworks like utilitarianism are WEIRD -
Western, educated, industrialized, rich and democratic, and that this
viewpoint is problematic when judging ethics. Which is to say, this is
a small subset of the population of all people on earth, and if most
people think along the lines of traditional duty-oriented ethics,
perhaps there are problems with enlightenment concepts that are still
regarded as alien by the mass of humanity. In particular, Haidt says
that concepts such as honor, loyalty and disgust as defining features
of ethics seem to be completely lacking in WEIRD Westerners, so
your ordinary garden-variety intellectuals may be seen as ethically
worse than those holding deontological views that defends things such
as, oh, caste systems and subjucation of women.

Haidt claims to be a "moral pluralist" and someone who personally
embraces enlightenment-style morality, but it is hard to see this
writing as anything more than a critique by a deontologist of
alternate ethical frameworks. The book is plainly written from the
perspect of someone who views that traditional ethics have merits that
utilitarianism or more sophisticated post-Kantian deontological ethics
do not. (I include post-Kantian deontological ethics as not being what
Haidt is defending because if you understand a term like "post-Kantian
deontological ethics," let's face it, you're WEIRD.)

Much as I sympathise with his framing of the problem, I don't agree
with the conclusion, and the "moral traps" of deontological thought is
the reason. Instead, these are traps anyone can fall into, traps that
explain the intuition that utilitiarians are more moral than most
people are comfortable with. Humans being what they are, if they can
"get away with something" while still convincing themselves they are
being a good person, they will do so. In any moral code, one must
beware of motivated reasoning, and traditional deontology allows many
such opportunities. I'm not even going to go through known "bad"
deontologies, like those of gang members or neofascist groups who view
their memberships as such overriding duties that they excuse actual
violent aggression against those outside of the group. I'll explore
those ordinary people fall into.

** Deontological Pollution **

For my first example, I'll take something out-of-context from my
childhood. I went to a Catholic school, and Catholic schools are very
clear about spelling out _duties_. Catholic ethics as practiced by the
nuns were nothing if not deontological. It was all about duty, and the
main duty that was drilled into us was that of _obey_. There were
forty of us in one class, no teacher's assistant, and no early
intervention screening for little Billy in the back row who tortured
frogs and liked to play with fire. If teacher couldn't get us to line
up properly to go to the bathroom, things were simply not getting
done. The drill seargent routine was there for a reason.

But when you get older, they have to give you ~~excuses~~ reasons for
everything you were being told what to do, and those reasons were
generally explained in terms of our duties as Christians, as citizens,
as sons and daughters, and so forth. I certainly remember something
like this being put on a blackboard:

* Duty to God
* Duty to Family
* Duty to Country
* ...

These lists kept going until you got something at the bottom like

* Duty to Mankind

Oh, and they were in order of priority.

The problem is that in general, if you have a long list like this, you
will always have conflicting duties. In general, things at the bottom
of the list will never get attended to, like an item you've carried on
your todo list for three months. Care of the community as a whole
generally comes down to being "somebody else's problem."

I call it "pollution" because the term applies to this problem in two
ways. One is a sort of figurative pollution; e.g. nobody cares about
mankind as a whole so long, as one's good intentions are always
"polluted" by a web of conflicting duties to be attended to. But it's
also literal, too; my impression is that otherwise decent people who
care little about the environment feel this way beause they think of
their duties in a strict prioritized hierarchy, and duty to the
envionment as a whole is much more abstract and touchy feely than some
manlier duty like ~~protecting one's family through the shedding the
blood~~ exploiting business opportunities to support one's family. The
environment comes dead last, and is something for wimpy tree-huggers
to fix, not those of us with "real responsibilities."

Leading to a related problem of...

### Snowplow Parents (or, the "Grizzly Mama" problem)

Let's talk about parenting. Here you'll find a good example of a bad
example.

One is always aware, as a parent, of the tradeoffs between what's good
for your children and what's good for all children. Most people in
American have a particular line the sand - basically, you can do
anything for your children, but it's wrong to interfere with how
parents raise their other children. If they wish to aggressively
pursue advantages for their children that you cannot create for your
own, you still have no right to interfere.

Much of the recent accusations of "opportunity hoarding" are attempts
to draw attention to the flaws of this mindset, albeit done in a
clumsy, accusatory way. If parents are allowed to purchase every
possible opportunity for their children, this starts to look less like
giving one's children a "helping hand," and more like an effort by
wealthy people to rig things so that only their children can ever
attain conventional success. From a utilitiarian perspective, some
checks are necessary on this, since such a system clearly serves the
utility of the few at the expense of the many.

For a deontologist, there is no problem. Indeed, strict deontologists
of a more conservative bent seems to think this is the way the world
_should_ work, going so far as to oppose publicly-funded education of
any sort. From their point of view, a singleminded dedication to one's
offspring is a duty overriding other all other ethical
imperatives. The problems of any lower (and middle!)  income children
left behind is not a responsiblity of society, but of their own
parents, who did not sacrifice enough to carry out their duty in a
similar manner. And if those parents did not sacrifice because they
did not have the material means necessary, then they failed in their
duty to become rich. I wish this were a straw man argument; I have
heard variants of it a number of times and I have heard milder version
of it come from religious leaders who should know better.

Taking this attitude to extremes, the logical outcomes are "snowplow
parents" who push aside even necessary obstacles for their children
and "grizzly mamas" willing to toss aside ethics to purchase
advantages for their own children. To them, the duty for their
children is of such primacy that all other duties, to their neighbors
and others, can be cast to the wind, excusing behavior that they
themselves would condemn as objectionable if they did it in service to
their own needs. Such people view their duty as not only right, but
necessary.

These extreme examples of people who think of themselves as ethical
even as they bend rules in fulfillment of their doties makes one if
indeed something else is going on.  The measures taken by such parents
are far in excess of what is needed to ensure one's offspring succeeds
in life, enough to produce grandchildren which are similarly prepared,
which is the ostensible purpose of this duty.  And indeed, something
else is going on, it is...

## Deontological Log-Rolling

Ethical belief systems have to deal with human nature, and human
nature has both good and bad aspects. It would be unsurprising if
people didn't subconsciously choose to limit the reach of their
duties. While people may be wired to be cooperative and ethical, they
seem even more wired towards using pursuasion to get their way,
whether or not it is ethical. If you can persuade someone that it
their ethical duty to get your way, so much the better.

One flaw with deontology is frequently, some one, be it an individual
or group, will be the beneficiary of some duty. Not the common weal,
but an individual, group of individuals or class. This is only
natural, and you may ask why I consider it a flaw. For instance, we
take it for granted that husbands in marriage have certain duties to
their wives, look askance at those who dump them for younger, more
attrative women, and garnish child support and alimony if they do
so. This is necessary and right. Women have limited age window for
reproduction, and the reason a woman insists you "put a ring on it"
before producing a brood for you is because after said brood, her
earning prospects and ability to attract an alternate mate are
shot. Likewise, the duty to one's parents is seen as similarly
necssary; in youth, because of their duty of guardianship, and in old
age, to ensure their care, particularly in less wealthy societies
where it is simply infeasble to have society provide the elderly the
support they need to live out their lives in peace and dignity.

The problem is, a number of these duties can certainly become iffy
over time. It is possible to invent duties by fiat merely to serve
oneself; indeed, [the invention of nationalism] may have been just
such a fiat duty invented by the powerful so that they could receive
fealty, even if for reasons that in some context is absolutely
defensible. Certainly, in the US, the "duty to country" seen in World
Wars I and II served a greater good in fighting authoritarian
ideologies, in spite of the fact that the American homeland was never
in serious danger.

### How "folk deontology" enables white supremacy

The actual invention of duties for selfish reasons would, of course,
never be condoned as ethical by a deontologist. The problem is, once
invented, people complying with these duties _believe they are
behaving ethically_. One of the worst sorts of invented duties took
place in the society of antebellum south, and extends even to this
day - that of "duty to your kind." If one wishes to find the root
cause for racism, white supremacy, and the recent ridiculous "great
replacement" conspiracy theories, it is in this invented duty. You'll
see it at work whenever someone complains about an ethnic group not
"taking care of its own." You'll see it whenever a white suprepacist
labels someone a "race traitor."

This invented duty is perhaps is the root of the recent mass shootings
of minorities - this idea that one has a "duty to one's kind," a duty
that even involves shedding blood. Why would someone martyr themselves
for such a cause? Because these are people who wholeheartly embraced
this duty and lived by it. So what happens when society's behavior
attempts to render this duty a dead letter and disregards it, through
widespread intermingling and intermarriage? People are going to fight
for it - because _to do otherwise is to admit to themselves and
everyone else that the reason they upheld these beliefs were not moral
in nature, but selfish and transactional._ Many would rather kill than
admit that.

## The Problem of Corrupt Authority

One of the most problematic aspects of deontology is that duty may
compel you to act in an unethical manner. Serious deontologists have
considered conflicts such as this seriously, and it is a straw man
argument to claim that this somehow reflects their position.

However, for ordinary laypersons, this poses a problem. Most people
are lazy (no offense); they will obey authority without question,
provided there is no inconvenience and no obvious harm to anyone
else. Additionally, they will _not_ do something not demanded by duty.

One problem with any ethical system is that for every person willing
to twist themselves in knots pondering complicated tradeoffs, there
are hundreds who look to an ethical system as a mechanism for getting
a clean "bill of health." And there is nothing
wrong with that. It is ridiculous to hold others to a standard even
the most motivated would find difficult. And if you think "well,
<religious person> should at least think along those lines," please
consider that many drawn toward religion are drawn due to their own
needs and may be further down the developmental path; you have a
problem of counterfactuals.

But one problem with any system of duties is that, once duties are
completed, they are done. The temptation is to draw one's duties as
narrowly as possible and say _I did my job_. Furthermore...

### Bad Faith (e.g. you corrupted the authority in the first place)

One's duties are generally not of one's own choosing. Of course, we
may shirk them. If our parents were horrid to us, we may ignore them
in our old age. If we don't like what what the government is doing
with our tax money, we may use that as an excuse to avoid paying
taxes. But if you do either of those things, you won't exactly brag
about it, and you be willing to spend a great deal of mental energy
justifying those things.

In both of those things, part of the difficulty is the inherent
inflexiblity in the idea of duty. There is little wiggle room; you
either do something or you don't, and if you don't, you'd best have a
good reason. From utilitarian ethics, there is a bit more wiggle
room. All things considered, it maximizes utility to have children
respect for their parents and continue to care for them in old
age. All things considered, it maximizes utility to relieve this
expectation when parents have shown to abuse their parental
authorities in the past. Utilitarian ethics allows for the concept of
duty, but it is always conditional upon what is best society as a whole.
This "wiggle room" is probably what causes so many people to bristle
at the "elitist" norms of the college educated crowd. Jonathan Haidt's
writings make clear that this attitude is not mere disagreement; it is
actual clear belief that other people are immoral, on they are willing
to act on.

The problem, therefore, is what this does to political norms. If you
feel a group of people is acting immorally, you are going to want to
stop them. If you can enlist the government, so much the better. The
result has been a legion of "populist" leaders. Much of their appeal
has been the fact that they appeal to those who think these duties
should be enforced. What are these duties? This is the part that is
never said out loud. But when one talks continuously of "restoring
respect for X," then the presumption is that people have been shirking
their duties to X, and the populist will bring about policies
enforcing compliance with these duties. Haidt's book is clear on what
sorts of duties these are; they are the "conservative" duties that
enlightentment philosophy many times stood against. Because of that,
frequently democratically elected government are restrained from
enforcing such duties! The frustrated deontologist, then, eventually
decides that if they can't get what they want, they will "vote with
their middle finger," as it were, and simply punish those they view to
be the duty-shirking elites.

Which leads to the main problem with the common deontologist attitude...

## Entitlement under Deontology (or, why you think "those people" are
   bad)



## So: What Does the Baha'i Faith Have to Say?


What am I? I don't know what I am (hopefully not an astard-bay, but we
all think more highly of ourselves than others do). But what I aim to
be is a virtues moralist, which is yet a third category:

    _Virtues Morals_ - you should cultivate the habits necessary to be
    the sort of person who instinctively carries out moral acts.

[I've explained why I tend toward this before](virtues), but to recap,
it's because I think most of us perform moral acts the way we perform
all other acts - more or less automatically, and if you don't train
yourself to have good habits before all else, you will undermine
whatever moral philosophy you claim to have, as otherwise you won't
actually be able to act on your philosophy whatever it is.

So in ("the trolly problem"), in which you have to decide whether to
flip a switch to save five people from certain death or leave it where
it is and watch one person die, the utilitarian would flip the switch
to save more lives, the deontologist would perform his duty not to do
anything which harms others, and the virtues moralist would put
himself in this position so many times that they habitually do the
right thing (which, incidentally, is also an episode of "The Good Place").
