## [](#header-2)About Us Arrogant Folk
_Warning: no religious content_

ar·ro·gant
[ˈerəɡənt]

ADJECTIVE:
having or revealing an exaggerated sense of one's own importance or abilities.

Let's take the above word. Supposing someone believes that a certain
"type" of person is arrogant. There are actually two ways one can
be labeled as arrogant:

1. Actually deserve it; that is, reveal an exaggerated sense of
importance or abilities due to claimed beliefs or thoughts.

2. Reveal *any* sense of importance  or confidence in one's opinion to
someone else who is trained to disregard or think of you as beneath him.

Definition #2 is not the dictionary definition, but I seem to see it
used a whole lot.

Of course, I've been called arrogant a time or two. Actually, just
once that I know of. But if you get called it once, there are probably
a few times you've been called this behind your back. Am I really an
arrogant person? I don't know. I have been told by more than a few
people that I am too reticent, not "tooting my own horn," and
generally having too low a self esteem to properly put myself
forward. Throughout life, I've thought of myself as basically decent,
but probably less likeable than your typical guy. But if I were all
that bad, I'm not sure people would been telling me to assert myself,
rather than the opposite. So when I hear the word arrogant, I
generally think of it as term that says more about the speaker than
about the person spoken about.

Part of this is I'm really not attuned toward arrogance, unless I see
actual harm. Meanwhile, I can't stand backbiting by others (though I
slip myself). Unless someone exhibits pure horrible behavior, I have a
hard time disliking someone. So I usually don't reach for the word
"arrogant" when I think of words for describing someone. And when I
have heard someone or a class of people, I usually haven't found that
person as arrogant. Instead, when I hear the word "arrogant" used, it
is frequently a shorthand for "how dare this person make me feel bad
about mysef." I have yet to see someone complain about an arrogant
person who isn't themself overinvested in protecting their own ego or
overly concerned with pretend offences against one's misplaced sense
of honor.

It's a bit like the complaint I hear about others who are said to be
"smug." Both terms are ostensibly about the person it's directed to,
but in reality are completely about the way it makes someone else
feel, intentionally or not. I so often hear it applied to someone who
isn't self-rightesion actually self-righteous, but simply has
committed the "offense" of having one's act together, morally
speaking. Vegetarian?  Smug. Environmentalist?  Smug. Religious?
Smug. Why? "How dare you behave in a moral fashion and make-me look
bad!!" The term "smug" is right up there with "virtue signaling."
Virtue signaling is when someone does something seen as moral so that
others know they are moral. I doubt it really exists, but I hear the
term used by some writers who seem to take offense that moral behavior
is prized by others. So interesting to know that if you really are moral,
some schmuck is going to see your actions and think you're virtue
signaling because, well, one presumes they don't feel that way about
themselves. "That's just virtue signaling, she wants others to think of
her as a good person. She's a b@stard like all the rest."

So why write about this? Am I just venting?

We've been told that somehow recent anti-democratic and illiberal
movements are a result of "arrogance" by "the elites." When you dig
in, "the elites" they are complaining about aren't the people who
actually run the country or businesses; no, no, it seems the problem
in over their heds with fury have no problems with ACTUAL elites who,
you know, might have CONTROL over social direction. Rather, the anger
is directed at the ten or fifteen percent of of the population who had
the wherewithal to get graduate degrees or have some sort of
"middle-class" profession. Or us big-city dwellers with our lattes and
Priuses and fancy jazz and public transportation. THOSE are the people
that are arrogant. Why are these "smug" folk viewed as
arrogant? What behaviors do they exhibit?

Wellllll... you have a difficulty getting these people to point to,
um, actual _behaviors_. But you'll get reasons aplenty. Just not ones
based on behavior. Instead, you'll hear about "attitude," meaning
someone is talking about how someone makes them feel, not about actual
behavior. You'll get a steady drip drip drip whine about how
"political correctness" is ruining the country because no one has the
patience to listen to discredited theories about how the world works,
or how you can't tell rascist jokes anymore becuase "nobody has a
sense of humor." Move past this and you'll get other matters having
nothing to do with people at all, but where they live: e.g. complaints
about "big city values" and not being able to feel safe in the
city. Or, you'll get anger about "attitude" of big city folk - but try
to find who they're angry at, and it's either a Hollywood actor or
someone in the media, which is not a realistic stand-in for a typical
degree-holding city-dweller.  Again, none of these point to
correctable behaviors. So what is the actual beef?

I think it's this: people in cities make more money than people who
don't. That makes people who don't live in cities really unhappy.

You see, it wasn't supposed to be this way. I grew up in suburban
Louisville, Kentucky in the seventies. Obviously, this wasn't exactly
rurual. It was in what I later learned was a "white flight"
neighborhood - full of people who had been German and Irish immigrants
who fled the arrival of African Americans coming in from the
country. Naturally, because our neighborhood was segregated, race was
never discussed, aside from this arms-length horse-manure of "that
neighborhood was great, until **they** moved in and ruined it for
everyone" or "they should take care of their own problems," where
"they" were never defined (fortunately, I never heard this nonsense
coming out of my parents' mouths). But all of this commentary was an
aside; in hindsight, what these suburbs were really full of, it
seemed, was people who just did not like the cities. The casual racism
was just the icing on the cake. The suburbs were really what they
wanted; they liked their (relatively) big yard and their subsidized
low tax base, being, as most suburbs were, in an unincorporated area
outside of the city. They liked good paying jobs of the cities,
without having to take a streetcar and live in multiunit housing. They
liked not having to compete for housing with poor people fleeing rural
poverty. And nobody can blame them for that.

But about the cities themselves? The unspoken assumption was All Those
Big Cities Are Doomed.

We could all hear our older relatives talk about how everything in the
cities was going down the tubes, about crime being out of control and
businesses moving out to the suburbs where the "real people" were. The
cold war just fed into this, as everyone was convinced that all the
cities would one day be "nuked," leaving nothing but "real
Americans" in charge. This talk was fed by our neighbors from the
country who went to Baptist churches and read nonsense like _The Late,
Great Planet Earth_, which presumed that all cities would be destoyed
with hellfire of atomic oblivion.

And cities like New York? Forget it! They were dooooomed!!! What with
the out of control crime and taxes, everyone regarded John Carpenter's
_Escape from New York_ as if it were a documentary.

When Reagan became president, this sort of thinking became ratified in
most neighbor's heads; it was not just a matter of biblical prophecy, but
seemed an inescapable economic certainty. Jobs would abandoned
the heavily-unionized areas in the north; the cities would wither
away; everyone with a brain would move to a low tax state into a
suburb with a nonexistent town center, leaving the ungrateful "poors"
to fend for themselves. Rural areas, too, would benefit, due to the
innate goodness of their citizens. Meanwhile, New York?  California?
"Taxechusettes"? All doomed; all would see their cities shrivel and
die; their grand universities abandoned by those who discovered what a
real "good education" looked like.

The events of the last forty years have been exceedingly unkind to
those beliefs.

That is where the charge of "arrogance" comes in. Instead of seeing
their fantasies play out, the white-flight residents of middle America
have been treated to something of a horror show. They've sat watching
the future helplessly, as the least popular kids in grammar school
went off to college moved to someplace like New York or Raleigh or
Austin and make a boatload of money. Wannna make a boatload of money?
Remeber all those cities that they said would burn in hellfire? New
York? San Francisco? Boston?  They're right up at the top. Meanwhile,
all those cities you read about for years as being "good for
business"? The smaller, low-tax, midmarket cities with the big
sprawling suburbs? Well, they're
nice. But you had to pick lucky - only certain citied thrived. Others
have only done ok. But one doesn't make a huge capital gains profit
from owning a house 30 years ago in the suburbs of a midmarket
city. You won't retire on it. Meanwhile, what about those
immigrants who moved into areas of Bronx, Queens and Brooklyn that
looked bombed out in the eighties and had the wherewithal to buy
property? Some of them are millionars now!

It turns out forty years of ill will toward the inhabitants of big
cities didn't do a damned thing. So that's why city dwellers are
arrogant. Not because we go around telling people how to live their
life. It's because _we_ were supposed to be the losers.

