---
title: A Moral Theory of Racism
category: in-progress
---

## A Moral Theory of Racism

One of the issues that has bedeviled our society for hundreds of years
is racism. To some extent, this is seen as odd - given that most people
agrees with the broad tenets that all humans are equal, what is the
reason for racism? Why is it that some people hold such high "racial
resentment" beliefs, beliefs that are easily disproven statistically
and seem more focused on cherry-picked anecdotes? What it is that
causes this weakness?

We all know them. Some are people we feel are very decent, at least
around us, "once you get to know them." Others have so many
objectionable characteristics that you hardly notice the racism  for
all the other problems they seem to have.
However much this has been speculated about, there is little
discussion of root causes of this prediliction, or of the way forward
with society.

Let's start with religious beliefs. While most religous beliefs have
nothing about racism as such, this has to take into account that
racism as a feature in society is actually fairly novel. In fact, to
my knowledge there is only one revealed religion whose origins lie
after the development of theories of race in the 1700s (more on that
later). While those who have neither respect nor knowledge of
religions are happy to pin religion as being at fault, the teachings
themselves hardly lend support for any support of tribalism. If
anything, the three great evangelizing religions of Christianity,
Buddhism and Islam all did their best to deemphasize the importance of
origin and place, if only to facilitate the spread of their
religion. Even though racists have attempted to use scripture of one
sort or other to back up their views, it is unsurprising that their
opponents have had a much more straightforward time finding scripture
to back up their own arguments to fight racism. Racists, on the other
hand, have generally used tortured, tenditious readings of the
scripture that generally would have no purchase in society, were it not
for the existence of powerful people grasping for whatever leverage they could
force out of intentional misreadings.

The one revealed religion I can speak about that does say something
about racism is my own, the Baha'i Faith. Their writings forbid
"racialism" in strong terms. Yet the founder and teacher Baha'u'llah
spoke little about racism as such, but in broader strokes, as
reflecting the spiritual equality and essential unity of
mankind. Racism was therefore not a particular sin, being called out
as a particular lack of a virtue. Rather, it is regarded as sign of
spiritual immaturity or lack of development, one which is later
spelled out as particularly pernicious, especially as it existed in
America.

If this is the case, then it would stand to reason that racism is
itself due to a particular lack of moral development. And that their
exponents are, more likely than not, underdeveloped morally in other
areas as well. This would imply that the underlying cause, rather than
being due to lack of broadmindedness or education, is primarily due to
a defect in moral reasoning or behavior. And that the solution lies in
efforts to upraise moral behavior, or "spiritual" behavior as regarded
in religious writings.

-----------------------------------------

One of the most notable theories of moral development was propounded
by psychologist Lawrence Kohlberg in a career spanning around
late 1950s0-1980s. This theory has garnered a fair amount of critique;
possibly the most serious was that of his own student Carol Gilligan,
who noted that the test groups used when developing his theory were
entirely male (!), an not-uncommon flaw of experiments prior to the
eighties. Perhaps more significant was the conflation between moral
_thought_, which is what Kohlberg's theory attempted to measure, and
moral _behavior_. Indeed, much of what one does as far as behavior is
automatic and done without reflection. This is one reason I'm more a
virtues moralist in this area. I suspect that for this reason, thought
has moved away from this theory.

However, in moving away from this model, something has been
lost. Virtues do not develop in a vacuum, and someone's ability to
think morally is necessary to to cultivate them. Additionally,
Kohlberg's framework allows for the fact that society at large tends
to be the frame of reference for the bulk of all people. A society
which cultivates unenlightened beliefs is one in which these
unenlightened beliefs will be reflected by the mass of the people.

Kohlberg's framework posits six stages of moral
development. The first stage, that of young children, is simply that
of

1. avoidance of punishment.

  This is an extremely egocentric
  viewpoint that views morality simply in terms of avoiding punishment
  to oneself,
  without any understanding of the morality behind it (yes, a young
  child has the mind of a psychopath). Fortunately, the does not
  describe the overwhelming majority of adults.

  The next two levels of
  morality are the lowest in which adults are at:

2. Transactional-based; e.g. self-interest
3. Morality as determined by social consensus; e.g. situational ethics

Those are the three lower levels of moral development, passed through
by hopefully all children and adolescents. The three higher levels of
moral development are driven by increasingly abstract principles of
justice. Kohlberg speculated that the two highest levels are only
reached by a minority of people - to the point that he had difficulty
establishing the emperical basis of his final sixth stage of morality,
a sort of Kantian "universal ethics" viewpoint.

The things to note about Kohlberg's moral development stage is that
people generally have a vague understanding of the immediate level
above them, but cannot understand the thought process of anyone two
or more levels above them.

Whether or not it is true, it is a "fun" sort of framework - "look,
rate yourself, rate your friends!" The fact is that there are lots of
borderline-sociopath selfish people (level 2s) running around angered and
flummoxed by marginally more advanced people who have no trouble
accepting ideals that are nothing more advanced than good citizenship
seems to be one of the defining features of our polarized nation. And
one can easily see why most libertarian gatherings are so fractious,
being that the movement attempts to accomodate both "level 2"
Rand-loving dirtbags with naive
idealists stunned that nobody understands them and wondering how on
earth the movement attracted so many dirtbags and how they can avoid
being identified as one. This is an amusing thought, but a bit of a
distraction.

A more serious thought game can be done with racism. Moral
development, and its lack in certain people, has serious reprecussions in the
thought processes of those in the lower levels of development.

Those in "stage three" reasoning generally are unable to understand
abstract concepts of ethics; they may, for example, understand that
Martin Luther King and Mahatma Ghandi were great men, but they have
trouble understanding why, aside from the fact that everyone else they
look up to seems to regard them as great men. They may revere them,
but only because their peer groups also find it necessary to do
so. They may understand, at least in the abstract, the level above
them (normative morality; e.g. "law and order"), but may only grasp it for themselves as a reflection of social consensus.

Kohlberg wrote that most leave stage three reasoning by the time the
reach adulthood, but there is a substantial minority which does not
progress beyond that. Obviously, the social environment in which these
people interact is going to matter a great deal to these people, and
will have a huge impact upon their beliefs of what "right" and "wrong"
are. (Personally, I think the sudden swing toward gay rights was in
fact a long drawn-out process that seemed fast because when enough
cultural leaders got in front of it, the stage three believers simply
swung the other way en masse.)

Those in "stage two" are more troublesome, and fortunately, far
fewer. This is the neighborhood of the criminal, the narcissist, the
sociopath or the macheavellian. Not only are they unlikely to
understand abstract ethical concepts, they have trouble with even
normative concepts. In short, they still have an extremely fuzzy grasp
on right and wrong, to the point that they are unable to view
normative laws except through their own veiwpoint; e.g. laws exist to
serve those who made the laws and no other reason. Fuzzy notions like
"equality before the law" simply do not exist to such people; laws
consist of nothing but arbitrary rules. Not only are laws an
inconvenience, other people with whom they have no relationships are
equally an inconvenience. They are capable of ethical behavior around
those with an established relationship, but only in so far as it
serves their own interest to do so. They may understand the moral
behavior of their "level three" friends, but primarily in the context
of a group loyalty that benefits the members over those outside of the
group.

For both the "level 2s and level 3s," a racist worldview may be
appealing. However, they are going to be for
different reasons. For a "stage three" member, morality is set by
their social community. If the norms of the society are racist, they
are going to go along with it. Indeed, if they view themselves and
their friends as benefitting, they will milk it for all it's
worth. Meanwhile, if racism is condemned, they will be quiet. They may
indeed hold racist views for other reasons, but will not say
anything. In public, they will certainly not admit anything that will
betray racism, and in private, it may depend upon their mood, whims,
or what they're feeling at the time.

For someone in "stage two" morality, this is far more clear
cut. The question is not why such a person would be racist, but
rather, why they would not. In all likelihood, they will hold racist
beliefs.  Why? Because they view things as entirely transactional. A
white person is very unlikely to need something from a minority -
those in power are generally white like them. Black people as a rule
get stepped on. As an aside, so are all sorts of white people, of
varying stripes.

Indeed, there is a valuable reason not only to practice racism, but to
spread it, among both groups. For stage two folk, it is one more way
of enforcing reciprocity - offer your white buddies something simply
for being white, and you will win friendship based on that. The goal,
at least a little bit, is to elevate one's position, as well as easy
"loyalty points" from people who would otherwise owe you nothing. And
for the stage three folk, who are used to seeing things in terms of
their peer group, if they do not consider any black friends as their
peers, they will certainly see no need to do anything; indeed, if
their peers are racist they will happily go along with it.

Given that such people are a significant minority in society, they
will tend to produce a significant drag towards movements for
equality. At worst, they will form the hardened core of an organized
racist opposition.

------------------------

This actually has particular meaning when we reflect on combating
racism. To this point, racism has been seen a problem of education or
lack of awareness. The goal has been to avoid seeing racists behavior
as indicative of moral flaws, or putting people on the spots. Yet all
of us know racists. How do they treat people with whom they do not
have regular relationships? Are they angels around everyone, or just
those they are close to or need things from?

Focusing on education and awareness has some strong points. By
recognizing that everyone can do something, this has the noble effect
of making sure everyone can contribute toward this effort through
their own interactions. If "we are all racist," that is empowering, in
the sense that we can do something under our own control. The focus on
"microagressions" ensures that we can ensure we don't do things that
will cause us to unknowingly distance others. And focus on things like
race amity allows people to come together and ensure that those of us
who can do something about racism are doing something.

However, it offers no solutions in the areas in which minorities truly suffer,
things like abuse by law enforcement, unequal treatment in the
financial industry, real estate practices like redlining and steering,
unequal funding of school systems. Compared to the institutional
practices of racism, microagressions seem like small potatoes -
essentially, improved social skills for those who are otherwise unable
to fight institutional racism.

The question is why such practices thrive when so many whites have
accepted their wrongness. Unfortunately, all it takes is a minority of
whites with the wrong belief in the wrong place to cause these
issues. The stamp of those bearing "level two" and "level three"
preconventional morality is all over such practices. Perpetuation of
the more harmful forms of institutional racism are not the province of
most people; not even those of those practicing the unchallenging
conventional morality of "level four" morality, would uphold this, and
this comprise the plurality of all adults. The cause must be traced
back to badly placed people of poor ethical development in positions
of power.

Now, it may be possible
that in areas where racism is still endemic insociety, so endemic as
to be written into the code of law, that such people contribute to
racism. And this was certainly the case in Jim Crow south. But
everywhere nowadays, the "shoulds" of society prevent this from taking
place, which is why racist laws tend to be propagated at the margins
and under false pretenses - things like "three strikes" laws and
intentional efforts to curtail voting right, where one has to be a
political junkie, relative to one's peers, to spot what is going on.

No, the bulk of the reason for institutional racism is the fact that
unethical people are everywhere. Many, if not most of them, will be
racist because it helps them or their family. And many of them will be
in positions where they can maintain or expand policies of
institutional racism.

------------------------------------------------

Unfortunately, I'm not aware of any sort of hard numbers or replicated
breakdown of how many people fit into these stages. But the theory
itself posits some general qualitative breakdowns. We know that most
people move past preconventional morality in their childhood but some
morally underdeveloped people spend their whole lives in "stage two."
We also know that most people reach "stage four" normative behavior by
some time after high school, but a significant number do not move past
"stage three." We know that a minority reach the postconventional
morality of "stage five," one that recognizes that social norms and
laws can and must change over time and circumstance. Finally, so few
reach "stage six" that Kohlberg himself had trouble getting
statistically reliable sample sizes.

If this qualitative breakdown is true, and if it is the case that
"stage two" and "stage three" social actors are operationally racists
in their actions, then this is troubling. Those that tend to actively
fight racism at the level of postconventional morality, but this is a
minority compared to the larger, less developed group. If nothing is
to be done, then the balance of these two forces will be a slow,
inexorable drag toward a racist society.

What, then, is the solution?

One is to improve the conditions of morality. But equally important is
to protect minorites from racism.

For the "stage three" members of society, efforts at education may be
effective. Unfortunately, it is the sort of education that is
difficult to deliver. When one is talking about elevating the thought
level of entire peer groups, this is tricky. Group dynamics tend to
lead to equilibrium in group thought. A group that is settled into a
stable set of beliefs is very hard to move. Still, these are people
who can understand normative morality, even if they don't think at
that level. Education, coupled with both strong peer pressure and
consistent legal standards, can work. This is probably how we saw the
sharp swing in attitudes toward tolerance of gays.

