---
title: About Those Social Justice Warriors
---

## Who Has a Beef with "Social Justice Warriors"

This is not a political post. Yet there are certainly those who will
see it as entirely political.

People have started to notice that churches in America are starting to empty
out. Not all at once, mind you, but slowly over time, things are
starting to get to the same pass that things were in Europe by
mid-twentieth century.

If you'd been an avid consumer of mass media, this trend may come as
something of a shock. Certainly, in popular culture, references to
religious activities have been rare for quite obvious reasons; a
sitcom family is far less appealing if they join a church that many
Americans are ill-disposed toward. But in the news, the story was
always focused on declines of mainline protestant churches only. In the news,
evangelical churches were always on the cusp of triumph, as their
megachurches filled, their shows became ever more present on cable,
and their politicians were elected again and again.

The truth is actually otherwise. Christianity as a whole has been
losing followers steadily. Certain trends had masked this. Evangelical
churches, far from appealing to atheists and the "unchurched,"
generally grew by poaching members from the mainline
churches. Likewise, megachurches grew by pulling people in from
mid-sized and smaller congregations. It is not at all hard to find
many small churches on the ropes; I've heard that the median size for
a church is under one hundred enrolled members. Most such churches
cannot afford maintenance of their buildings and decent salaries for
their pastors. Under such a circumstances, new churches are not going
to open; you would need at least that many just to rent a building
(probably, in one of the suffering churches). It is probable that in
the next few decades, the actual number of churches will drop sharply as
compared to the number of Christian believers.

Christians who have managed to escape the Fox News Conservative Happy
Talk Bubble have notice these trends, and many of them have started to
cast about for blame. There is an obvious cause - that of
secularization. People no longer feel the need to engage in a
church. Many have noted that many Americans still feel a strong
spiritual connection, but still do not wish to join a church.

Were this like any other business, this sort of situation would focus
the mind quite clearly. You look at what your challenges are, what
your opportunities are, and how to meet them. If you're in the
business of religion, the solutions present themselves a little more
obviously. Focus on guiding people spiritually. Treat people's needs
with respect. Make sure people's tithes go towards efforts that help
relieve suffering, instead of building efforts, evangelical PR and
charities of dubious effectiveness. Give people's intelligence a
little credit. Help people to become better people. Lead people on the
spiritual path without forcing doctrine and outdated beliefs down
their throat.

For those who like how churches have been doing things, this is not in
the cards.

Many of the people active in Christian circles - particularly
evangelical - are quite happy with churches as they are. The problem
with falling membership is not that it means that people's spiritual
needs are unmet. The problem, rather, is that "their tribe" is getting
weaker. Their tribe, of course, being the conventional conservative
Christian, who has managed to mold evangelical Christianity into a
cause for maintaining a socially conservative business-as-usual. Such
people like Christianity not because they actually like what this
Jesus fellow said - they hardly quote the guy - but because these
Christian churches enforce a world view they very much like, one that
keeps the more idealistic members focused on cultivating their inner
selves, rather than meddling with existing social structures and
carrying out meddlesome "fixes" to cure racism, economic inequality,
policing and a host of other issues.

Such people would love to tie the decline of the churce to their _bete
noire_. Looking about, they see the enemy they've always seen -
liberals.

And so I've seen two recent wrongheaded articles in the usual mass
media wringing their hands over the losses of religious
institutions. And the problem, they find, are the same people they
dislike so much in the first place - political opponents.  The problem
diagnosed is that in sooooo many churches, the pastors are "selling
out" to these so-called social justice warriors. They are accused of
co-opting Christianity and thereby weakening it, and that is the
reason the church is weaker. Because they are driving away believers
who don't agree with these teachings.

-------------------------------

There are two problems with this. One is the obvious empirical reason
why this is nonsense. And the other is a philisophical reason that
makes this position so structurally unsound that it is a wonder anyone
would even voice it out loud.

Emperically, here's the problem - there is no reason to think that
this correlation is causation. It is true that mainline denominations
have been losing members for decades. If this were causational, then
they would lose these people to more conservative denominations. And
on top of this, conservative denominations would be growing _above and
beyond_ the cohort of people defecting to conservative denominations.

In the sixties, this was certainly the case, but that is not what is
currently happening. True, after the civil rights movement, for a
twenty year period, evangelical churches grew and mainline churches
retreated in membership. With hindsight, we now know that much of this
was caused by parishioners leaving for the more conservative
churches. It was not as a result of drawing in unbelievers and the
unchurched. In fact, it could be shown evangelical churches shed
believers at roughly the same rate as the mainline churches. This fact
was hidden by the shift of disgruntled conservatives from the
mainlines to the evangelical denominations.

Now the sorting sorting process having taken place, and it now appears
that the rate of retreat of mainline and evangelical churches are now
roughly on par. The writers are right to be concerned that churches
are losing membership, but thanks to the sorting that has already
occurred, claims this is due to political partisanship does not stand
up to scrutiny. There are many churches catering to political
partisans of all strips, and all seem to be losing people
uniformly. Making mainline churches more hospitable to those who
object to left-of-center values will not stem this decline.

However, there is a more crucial flaw that underlies all these objections.

The phrase "social justice warrier" is used by many of these
ostensible christians as a sarcastic moniker, something showing barely
less contempt as the old "bleeding heart liberal" badge.

Therein lies the problem. The reason so many of such people go into
positions of religious leadership is because _those are the people
drawn into following religious teachings_.

Pick up a "red letter" edition of the Bible and read that. While
you're doing that, note the stuff that appears in red, the stuff the
Jewish carpenter-guy was saying. Are you telling me the problem is
that your religious leaders _actually seem to be listening to what
that stuff in the red letters talks about? Is that your problem?_

This is not a real problem. It is a problem with the fact that the
moment is lost for such people. There was a shining glorious moment
where you could pretend God, capitalism and a conservative attitude
were on the same side, but that moment is past. Eventually God is
going to demand that everything else comes after him.