---
title: What to Do After Democracy
category: article
---

Those of us raised in the United States are given, as our birthright,
a world views which generally reigns unquestioned, at least among
educated society:

* A capitalistic economy, based on "market-based" principles;

* A government which nominally democratic, and technically republican,
  based on partisan coalitions vying for government control through
  elections.

This two-faceted view of society is so widespread and accepted that
most educated citizens cannot imagine any form of
economy or government that could possibly be superior in nature to
this. Efforts at reform or improvement tend to be framed in accordance
with how conformant any improvements are with these two world
views. Indeed, one reason for "the end of history" narrative at the
completion of the 20th century was due to a lack of any realistic
compelling alernative for these world views.

From the point of view of The Baha'i Faith, both have much scope of
improvement. In this paper, we will focus on society's current view on
civic governance. While the Baha'i Faith has much to say about economic
concerns, and there is certainly an interplay between the economic
system and the civic government of states, we will consider issues of
economics out of the scope of this paper.(1)

One reason for this two-pronged world view is the complete lack of
appealing alternatives. While known alternatives to capitalism are
generally viewed as disagreeable and inefficient, known alternatives
to democracy are generally feared outright. It's difficult to find
working alternatives to market economies, but quite easy to find the
primary alternative to partisan representative democracies: the
antidemocratic kleptocracy. Indeed, for all of the alternatives of
democracy in the 20th century - communism, military dictatorships,
fascism - all of them had this same underlying dynamic of an
authoritarian ruler propped up by a favored class that worked to
ensure the stability of the system. Whether this favored class was
distinguished by membership in a political party, oligarchy, ethnic group or
the military, did not matter: the underlying mechanism was the
same. Whatever the situation, the outcome was predictably horrifying
for the citizens unfortunate enough to find themselves in an unfavored
class under such misrule. Indeed, much of the present concern with US
Government is the possiblity that the same thing could happen here
through a _herrenvolk_ corruption of our current system.

Perhaps as a result, alternatives to current forms of representative
democracy, be they parlimentiary, presidential or otherwise, are
rarely envisioned. While democracy has its problems, problems with
democracy as such are mainly aired by the extremely marginalied, or
alternatively, affluent or wealthy society members with no professed
concern for a just society. The good-government believers in
liberalism, while well aware of problems with democracy, are content in
their belief that democracy is "the worst form of government, except
for all the others." Attempts to improve government are generally
thought of only in terms of marginal structural fixes: eliminating
corporate bias, corruption and influence-buying, or governmental
modifications aimed at making the system more purely democratic.

## Democracy: The Need for a Way Forward

    I've said it before and I'll say it again. Democracy simply
    doesn't work.
        -- Kent Brockman (fictional character on _The Simpsons_)

Anyone who lived through the nineties in the US is probably familiar
with this quote, intended to be satirical. Unfortunately, those of us
living presently may be wondering if the animated narrator was playing it
straight. Despite the efforts of reformers, the state of government is
getting worse, as many democracies fall prey to the same intractable
problems:

* Easy corruption of the system by entrenched, monied interest;

* Obvious manipulation of popular will caused by propaganda against
  minority groups;

* Gridlock caused by thoughtless partisanship, entrenched by masses of
  voters that use the franchise to reward those in their on class and
  punish those outside of it;

* The elevation of the incompetent and corrupt by "low-information
  voters";
  
* The creation of disconnected bureaucracies that frequently must
  ignore popular will in the name of "getting something done";

* The formation of elite decision-making bodies that frequently have
  neither the skills nor the mandate to defend their decisions against
  propaganda by entrenched interests that benefit from the status quo;

* A remarkable vulnerability to majoritarian abuses of
  power;

* The ability of demagogues to entirely subvert the system by rigging
  democratic institutions once they gain positions of power.

Many of these problems have been the signal signs of poorly
functioning governments throughout the developing world. While
defenders of liberalism have generally attributed such failures due to
lack of a tradition of democratic norms and imperialistic manipulation
by foreign powers, this does not explain the sudden appearance of these
problems throughout democracies in advanced economies where such norms
had been considered historically strong.

Defenders of both liberalism and democracy, therefore, have a
challenge: it seems they can either have a society in conformance with
liberal values, or one that values the ability of voters to chose
their representatives through majority vote. Current trends indicate
that having both of these at the same time are sometimes infeasible,
since voters of all the nations frequently use their franchise to
elect representatives whose core political platform is to take a
hammer to said liberal values. It is time to consider a unpopular
thought: that the permanent, stable establishment of a
just governments may mean rethinking key structures in the forms of
representative democracy as they are present throughout the world.

One must start with an ideal: a government that involves all citizens
in a broad-based vision of self-government, guaranteeing justice and
equal freedoms for all; one that eliminates the flaws of
representative democracies while not repeating the mistakes that
doomed the flawed regimes democracy replaced, be they monarchical,
authoritarian, totalitarian, oligarchical or otherwise. To this, one
may look to the vision of the Baha'i Administrative Order.

As Baha'is, we belief the Baha'i model of governance can contribute
many positive elements for discussion. While democratic in operation,
it presents several unusual features that distinguish it markedly from
normal democratic structures. Many of these ideals are not new, but
instead reflect some of the ideals of other thinkers of democracy in
the past. Ironically, many of these ideas have strong parallels with
recommendations by the "founding fathers" of the US and the other
enlightenment thinkers of democracy's early days. Over time, many were
discarded, some for reasons of expedience; others, because they could
not work in isolation from other principles.

It must be acknowledged that there is a very reasonable fear for any
government that does not incorporate familiar democratic structures
such as political parties or uses them in an indirect manner (say, by
electing electors to actually select leaders). Movements to limit
democracy and public input have frequently been used by powerful
majorities as a way to exclude input from disfavored minorities or by
historically privileged groups to retain this privelege in the face of
public unpopularity. Yet this sort of "controlled democracy" need not be the
only alternative, and it is necessary to produce a vision of something
beyond democracy that remedies its flaws without introducing other
problems. One may disagree with this author's estimation of the state
of democracies throughout the world. What is not debateable is the
constant need of new ideas to ensure progress in this area.

## Participative Government: the Baha'i Alternative

    Leaders of religion, exponents of political theories, governors of
    human institutions, who at present are witnessing with perplexity
    and dismay the bankruptcy of their ideas, and the disintegration
    of their handiwork, would do well to turn their gaze to the
    Revelation of Baha'u'llah. (Shoghi Effendi, _World Order of
    Baha'u'llah_ 21-Mar-1930).

The World Order of Baha'u'llah, as spelled out by Shoghi Effendi, is
_sui generis_ among governing institutions. Its democratic makeup
frequently leads people to classify it as a democratic institution. As
such, it is seen to have all of the elements of a representational
democracy, with representatives (assemblies), executive offices, and
the normal functionaries.

From this point of view, then, it would not seem that the Baha'i Faith
has much to offer; it is yet another democratically-elected
institution. Yet it doesn't take much study of this structure to note
that, at least with respect to a representative democracy, there is
much that doesn't "look right" to Western eyes. Assembly members are
elected by plurality, not majority, with no runoff. There is no formal
"separation of powers." There is no system of political parties or
factions to organize people on the basis of comon interest. There are
no nominations or runoff elections. The representatives that are
elected are not held as responsible to the voters, which is just as
well, since in practice there is no way of knowing the way any
assembly person voted; minutes of meetings are generally open and
available, but are written in a way that does not identify the
speakers. There are no "Robert's Rules of Order" to keep
parliamentarians busy.

The problem is a misunderstanding of the governing structure, as set
forth in writings such as The World Order of Baha'u'llah. While the
Baha'i Faith uses "democratic methods," the Baha'i Faith is not
truly a democracy, at least not in the sense we are used to:

   This new-born Administrative Order incorporates within its
   structure certain elements which are to be found in each of the
   three recognized forms of secular government [democracy, despotism
   or aristocracy], without being in any sense a mere replica of any
   one of them, and without introducing within its machinery any of
   the objectionable features which they inherently possess.
       (Shoghi Effendi, The World Order of Baha'u'llah, p. 152)

What is the Baha'i Faith governance model, then? We are told that it
is a model for future governance of the human race, but if it is not a
democracy, what is it?

It is a form of _participative government_ for sure. In the west, we
generally think of participative government as meaning a
representative democracy. These representative democracies may take
different forms - some are ruled with a separate executive and
legislative branch, some with a parliament. But this hides the fact
that there is really very little variance in the structure of
western-style governance. Most of what we study in political science
applies to these forms of governance exactly, and such governments are
so dominant that even autocracies find it convenient to mimic the
institutions of such government, in spite of the fact that the
resulting assemblies rarely carry out any meaningful mandate. (After
all, if the government is superfluous, why spend time being creative
when you draw your consititution? Just copy one that's popular and
go about ignoring it.)

In fact, these unusual points are not flaws, but important features. A
proper understanding of the Baha'i model of governance must identify
these features so that they can be appreciated for the improvements
they suggest on the democratic model. This paper will show that the
bulk of these unusual features, far from being flaws in the democratic
model, are intentional mechanisims, the central purpose of which is to
ensure that proper decisions are made that takes into account the
views of as broad a representation of the members of the Baha'i Faith
as possible. (2)

This paper will proceed as follows: an analysis of key unusual
features of the Baha'i Faith will take much of the paper. After
analysis, the paper will discuss the improvements the Baha'i model
offers in both smaller-scale civic and volunteer organization,
followed by consideration of this model at the scale of the
nation-state. In many cases, these features are not novel, but were
presented by earlier writers from the enlightenment founders of
democracy; such writings give perspective on theese points.

## An Analysis of Key Baha'i Principles from the Writings

There are a number of key principles that underlie Baha'i
governance. While all of these are familiar to Baha'is, they are worth
identifying them explicitly. Many of these principles are unusual for
civic bodies, and all are worth examining.

Students of The Faith, including the bulk of Baha'is, are familiar
with these principles of Baha'i governance as laid laid forth in
Shoghi Effendi's _World Order of Baha'u'llah_. However, one must
realize this was not a latter-day innovation imposed upon the
teachings outlined by Baha'u'llah. Shoghi Effendi was at pains to
point out to believers that the most important of these principles
were restatements of principles enunciated by both Baha'u'llah and
'Abdu'l-Baha:

    The concentration of authority in the hands of the elected
    representatives of the believers; the necessity of the submission
    of every adherent of the Faith to the considered judgment of
    Baha'i Assemblies; His preference for unanimity in decision; the
    decisive character of the majority vote; and even the desirability
    for the exercise of close supervision over all Baha'i
    publications, have been sedulously instilled by Abdu'l-Baha, as
    evidenced by His authenticated and widely-scattered Tablets. (27-Feb-1929)

So far from being inventions by The Guardian, the bulk of these have
antecedents in writings of both Baha'u'llah and 'Abdu'l-Baha.

This author has identified a number of key governing principles of the
Baha'i Faith. While not claimed to be either exhaustive or
authoritative; in particular, many of the religious aspects of Baha'i
governments have been purposely omitted due to scope of work
(3). Rather, the goal of this list is practical in nature: to
serve as a summary of governing principles that can be carried over to
other governing organizations. The hope is that it can contribute to a
dialog on improving existing governing structures, both at the secular
level, and at the level of governments of voluntary civic
associations.

**Decisions Made through Consultation, with Strong Preference for Unanimity**

Consultation is the central mechanism under which decisions are made
in the Baha'i community. Consultation is a consensus-oriented
decision-making process. It is a central feature of the Baha'i Faith,
lauded by its central figures as the ideal mechanism for justice:

    The heaven of divine wisdom is illumined with the two luminaries
    of consultation and compassion and the canopy of world order is
    upraised upon the two pillars of reward and punishment.

	(Baha'u'llah, Tablets of Baha'u'llah, p. 126) (The third
	Ishraq)

    The Great Being saith: The heaven of divine wisdom is illumined
    with the two luminaries of consultation and compassion. Take ye
    counsel together in all matters, inasmuch as consultation is the
    lamp of guidance which leadeth the way, and is the bestower of
    understanding.

	(Baha'u'llah, Tablets of Baha'u'llah, p. 168)

The core process of consultation is set forth at length in various
tablets. This excerpt from 'Abdu'l-Baha includes many important points:

    So they (members) must confer and consult in such a way that
    neither disagreement nor abhorrence may occur. When meeting for
    consultation, each must use perfect liberty in stating his views
    and unveiling the proof of his demonstration. If another
    contradicts him, he must not become excited because if there be no
    investigation or verification of questions and matters, the
    agreeable view will not be discovered neither understood. The
    brilliant light which comes from the collision of thoughts is the
    "lightener" of facts.

    If all views are in harmony at the end of a conference, it will be
    excellent; but if, God forbid! disagreement occurs, then the
    decision must be according to the greater number in harmony. If,
    after reaching the result, one or other of the members does not
    agree with it, neither of the other members nor any one must argue
    with or reproach him, but keep silence; then they will write to
    this Servant.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, Baha'i World Faith - Abdu'l-Baha Section, p. 406)

Ideally consultation will result in a unanimous decision. If this is
not possible, it may be necessary to make a decision by majority vote,
but this is never a preferred alternative. If a vote was taken, the
decision is treated no differently than any other unanimous decision;
there is no "minority report" or dissention:

    "It is important to realize that the spirit of Bahá'í consultation
    is very different from that current in the decision-making
    processes of non-Bahá'í bodies.

    The ideal of Bahá'í consultation is to arrive at a unanimous
    decision. When this is not possible a vote must be taken. In the
    words of the beloved guardian: '... when they are called upon to
    arrive at a certain decision, they should, after dispassionate,
    anxious and cordial consultation, turn to God in prayer, and with
    earnestness and conviction and courage record their vote and abide
    by the voice of the majority, which we are told by the Master to
    be the voice of truth, never to be challenged and always to be
    whole-heartedly enforced.'

    As soon as a decision is reached it becomes the decision of the
    whole Assembly, not merely of those members who happened to be
    among the majority.

    When it is proposed to put a matter to the vote, a member of the
    Assembly may feel that there are additional facts or views which
    must be sought before he can make up his mind and intelligently
    vote on the proposition. He should express this feeling to the
    Assembly, and it is for the assembly to decide whether or no
    further consultation is needed before voting.

    Whenever it is decided to vote on a proposition all that is
    required is to ascertain how many of the members are in favour of
    it; if this is a majority of those present, the motion is carried;
    if it is minority, the motion is defeated. Thus the whole question
    of 'abstaining' does not arise in Bahá'í voting. A member who does
    not vote in favour of a proposition is, in effect, voting against
    it, even if at that moment he himself feels that he has been
    unable to make up his mind on the matter."

        (From a letter of the Universal House of Justice to the
        National Spiritual Assembly of Canada, March 6, 1970:
        Consultation: A Compilation, p. 12, February 1978)

	(Compilations, Lights of Guidance, p. 47)

Some further principles regarding consultation in communities:

    "In your letter of 4 April you enquire further about the
    principles governing the presence of a member of the National
    Assembly when a matter concerning him or her personally is being
    discussed.

    The first principle to bear in mind is that every member of an
    Assembly has an absolute and incontrovertible right to be present
    at every meeting of that body and to be fully informed of every
    matter coming before it.

    The second principle is that of detachment in consultation. The
    members of an Assembly must learn to express their views frankly,
    calmly, without passion or rancour. They must also learn to listen
    to the opinions of their fellow members without taking offence or
    belittling the views of another. Bahá'í consultation is  180  not
    an easy process. It requires love, kindliness, moral courage and
    humility. Thus no member should ever allow himself to be prevented
    from expressing frankly his view because it may offend a fellow
    member; and, realizing this, no member should take offence at
    another member's statements.  

    The Third principle is that if a believer feels that he has been
    done an injustice by the Assembly, he should appeal the decision
    in the normal way.

    (From a letter of the Universal House of Justice to the National
    Spiritual Assembly of Italy, August 26, 1965)

	(Compilations, Lights of Guidance, p. 179)

Naturally, with so much emphasis on consultation, it takes a central
part of the deliberating and decision-making process in the
legislative bodies of the Baha'i Administrative Order. Decisions are
not to be made through diktat by a majority. Instead, they should be
made through consultation. Regarding the function of elected
representatives:

    Their function is not to dictate, but to consult, and consult not
    only among themselves, but **as much as possible with the friends
    whom they represent**. They must regard themselves in no other light
    but that of chosen instruments for a more efficient and dignified
    presentation of the Cause of God.

	(Shoghi Effendi, Baha'i Administration, p. 64), emphasis added
	by this author.

Emphasis is added to note that elected representatives must not only
bring forward their own opinions and thoughts in discussion, but must
also be aware of those throughout the community.

Likewise, Baha'i communities have meetings where all members of the
Baha'i Faith may make recommendations and proposals for consideration
by these assemblies. These meetings are run through consultation:

    'Abdu'l-Bahá emphasized the importance of the spiritual and
    devotional character of these gatherings.  Shoghi Effendi, besides
    further elaborating the devotional and social aspects of the
    Feast, has developed the administrative element of such gatherings
    and, in systematically instituting the Feast, has provided for a
    period of consultation on the affairs of the Bahá'í community,
    including the sharing of news and messages.

	(Translation notes for The Kitab-i-Aqdas, p. 202)

Indeed, consultation is central, not only for governing institutions,
but for all other institutions as well: appointed institutions, ad-hoc
tasks forces and grassroots activities only indirectly answerable to
such institutions.

It should be noted that the spirit of consultation is as important as
the mechanics of the consultation. Ordinary political discourse
commonplace is considered far from the ideal. 'Abdu'l-Baha' commented
on a parliamentary seesion he once attended:

    In this Cause consultation is of vital importance, but spiritual
    conference and not the mere voicing of personal views is
    intended. In France I was present at a session of the senate, but
    the experience was not impressive. Parliamentary procedure should
    have for its object the attainment of the light of truth upon
    questions presented and not furnish a battleground for opposition
    and self-opinion. Antagonism and contradiction are unfortunate and
    always destructive to truth. In the parliamentary meeting
    mentioned, altercation and useless quibbling were frequent; the
    result, mostly confusion and turmoil; even in one instance a
    physical encounter took place between two members. It was not
    consultation but comedy.

    The purpose is to emphasize the statement that consultation must
    have for its object the investigation of truth. He who expresses
    an opinion should not voice it as correct and right but set it
    forth as a contribution to the consensus of opinion, for the light
    of reality becomes apparent when two opinions coincide. A spark is
    produced when flint and steel come together. Man should weigh his
    opinions with the utmost serenity, calmness and composure. Before
    expressing his own views he should carefully consider the views
    already advanced by others. If he finds that a previously
    expressed opinion is more true and worthy, he should accept it
    immediately and not willfully hold to an opinion of his own. By
    this excellent method he endeavors to arrive at unity and
    truth. Opposition and division are deplorable. It is better then
    to have the opinion of a wise, sagacious man; otherwise,
    contradiction and altercation, in which varied and divergent views
    are presented, will make it necessary for a judicial body to
    render decision upon the question. Even a majority opinion or
    consensus may be incorrect. A thousand people may hold to one view
    and be mistaken, whereas one sagacious person may be
    right. Therefore, true consultation is spiritual conference in the
    attitude  73  and atmosphere of love. Members must love each other
    in the spirit of fellowship in order that good results may be
    forthcoming. Love and fellowship are the foundation.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, The Promulgation of Universal Peace)

As indicated in many quotes above, the central purpose of consultation
is not a drive for a premature consensus, but a frank airing of all
views and viewpoints, ideally divoriced from uninformed opinion or
preconceived notions. Disagreements, rather than being supressed, must
be aired freely; however, disagreements should never lapse into
argumentation or disrespect. Baha'is believe that proper consultation
requires an attitude best described as "spritual" to ensure the right
decisions are made:

    There are spiritual principles, or what some call human values, by
    which solutions can be found for every social problem. Any
    well-intentioned group can in a general sense devise practical
    solutions to its problems, but good intentions and practical
    knowledge are usually not enough. The essential merit of spiritual
    principle is that it not only presents a perspective which
    harmonizes with that which is immanent in human nature, it also
    induces an attitude, a dynamic, a will, an aspiration, which
    facilitate the discovery and implementation of practical
    measures. Leaders of government and all in authority would be well
    served in their efforts to solve problems if they would first seek
    to identify the principles involved and then be guided by them.

    The Universal House of Justice, in The Promise of World Peace, p. 28

	(Compilations, NSA USA - Developing Distinctive Baha'i Communities)

As such, the effectiveness of consultation depends upon the nature of
the interactions and respectful attitude of all of the
participants. This being the case, it is presumed that assemblies are
capable of discussing things in an ordered manner without unnecessary
formalization: 

    Such systems as "Robert's Rules of Order" have no authority in
    Bahá'í consultation. Each Assembly should agree on the details
    necessary for maintaining an orderly flow of consultation and
    should revise them as required.

	(Compilations, NSA USA - Developing Distinctive Baha'i Communities)

Decisions made in consultation are never considered truly final, in
that new information may come to light that forces reconsideration of
the decision. But without such information, believers are asked to let
the decision stand without further argument, to ensure that it has
time to take efect and be evaluated.

    A believer can ask the Assembly why they made a certain decision
    and politely request them to reconsider. But then he must leave it
    at that, and not go on disrupting local affairs through insisting
    on his own views. This applies to an Assembly member as well.
    
    Written on behalf of Shoghi Effendi, in The Local Spiritual
    Assembly, p. 27

In case of abuse, there is a mechanism for appeal. In particular, if
someone is unsatisfied about a decision made, particularly one
involving infringement of one's rights or improper procedures, the
members are encouraged to appeal to a higher authority if it is not
possible to get satisfaction from the assembly:

    Appeal of a Decision 
    Whenever there is any infringement of Bahá'í
    rights, or lapse in the proper procedure, the friends should take
    the matter up with the Assembly concerned, and, if not satisfied,
    then with the National Spiritual Assembly. This is both their
    privilege and their duty.

        Shoghi Effendi, July 10, 1942, enclosed with a letter written
        on behalf of the Universal House of Justice, dated January 1,
        1989

	(Compilations, NSA USA - Developing Distinctive Baha'i Communities)

Consultation is so sentral to the Baha'i Faith, and has been found so
helpful in areas outside of the Baha'i Faith, that this is probably
the feature of the Baha'i Faith most eagerly adopted by civic
organizations outside of the faith. However, there are many more
features that merit consideration.

**Governing Representatives Have No Constituency**

The reasons given for elections for governing bodies are very clear
and were outlined very early in the history of the Baha'i Faith. Per
'Abdu'l-Baha:

    In the present writer's view it would be preferable if the
    election of nonpermanent members of consultative assemblies in
    sovereign states should be dependent on the will and choice of the
    people. For elected representatives will on this account be
    somewhat inclined to exercise justice, lest their reputation
    suffer and they fall into disfavor with the public.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, The Secret of Divine Civilization, p. 23)

These elected assemblies at the varying levels are conducted to legislate. Much
like in parliamentary systems, there is no formally separate executive to
carry out their orders. However, the elected persons are not to be
though of as representatives. Per Shoghi Effendi:
    
    The Administrative Order of the Faith of Baha'u'llah must in no
    wise be regarded as purely democratic in character inasmuch as the
    basic assumption which requires all democracies to depend
    fundamentally upon getting their mandate from the people is
    altogether lacking in this Dispensation. In the conduct of the
    administrative affairs of the Faith, in the enactment of the
    legislation necessary to supplement the laws of the Kitab-i-Aqdas,
    the members of the Universal House of Justice, it should be borne
    in mind, are not, as Baha'u'llah's utterances clearly imply,
    responsible to those whom they represent, nor are they allowed to
    be governed by the feelings, the general opinion, and even the
    convictions of the mass of the faithful, or of those who directly
    elect them.

Rather, they are elected to come to a correct decision:

    They are to follow, in a prayerful attitude, the
    dictates and promptings of their conscience.

Additionally, in these consultations, elected assembly members are
told to disregard their own inclinations:

    The members of these Assemblies, on their part, must disregard
    utterly their own likes and dislikes, their personal interests and
    inclinations, and concentrate their minds upon those measures that
    will conduce to the welfare and happiness of the Baha'i Community
    and promote the common weal.

In other words, even should one vote for assembly members with an eye
toward electing assembly members whose views they prefer, this
strategy would be ineffective, as a dutiful assembly member would not
allow his own inclinations to interfere with decisions.

Contrariwise, the conditions of the community are indeed important,
and must inform all deliberations. Continuing, Shoghi Effendi elaborates:

    They may, indeed they
    must, acquaint themselves with the conditions prevailing among the
    community, must weigh dispassionately in their minds the merits of
    any case presented for their consideration, but must reserve for
    themselves the right of an unfettered decision. (WOB 8-Feb-1934)

Assembly members must not make their decision in isolation from the
community, but should rather be very informed with any information
community members present:

    Their function [elected representatives] is not to dictate, but to
    consult, and consult not only among themselves, but as much as
    possible with the friends whom they represent.

And futher,

    They must, at all times, avoid the spirit of exclusiveness, the
    atmosphere of secrecy, free themselves from a domineering
    attitude, and banish all forms of prejudice and passion from their
    deliberations. They should, within the limits of wise discretion,
    take the friends into their confidence, acquaint them with their
    plans, share with them their problems and anxieties, and seek
    their advice and counsel.

Indeed, the solicitaiton of advice from other Baha'is and the
cultivation of personal initiatives is one of the requirements of
anyone serving on these elcted bodies:

    Let it be made clear to every inquiring reader that among the most
    outstanding and sacred duties incumbent upon those who have been
    called upon to initiate, direct and coordinate the affairs of the
    Cause, are those that require them to win by every means in their
    power the confidence and affection of those whom it is their
    privilege to serve. Theirs is the duty to investigate and acquaint
    themselves with the considered views, the prevailing sentiments,
    the personal convictions of those whose welfare it is their solemn
    obligation to promote. Theirs is the duty to purge once for all
    their deliberations and the general conduct of their affairs from
    that air of self-contained aloofness, from the suspicion of
    secrecy, the stifling atmosphere of dictatorial assertiveness, in
    short, from every word and deed that might savor of partiality,
    self-centeredness and prejudice. Theirs is the duty, while
    retaining the sacred and exclusive right of final decision in
    their hands, to invite discussion, provide information, ventilate
    grievances, welcome advice from even the most humble and
    insignificant members of the Baha'i family, expose their motives,
    set forth their plans, justify their actions, revise if necessary
    their verdict, foster the spirit of individual initiative and
    enterprise, and fortify the sense of interdependence and
    co-partnership, of understanding and mutual confidence between
    them on one hand and all local Assemblies and individual believers
    on the other. (BA 18-Oct-1927)

**Voting Based on Character and Competency Rather than Political
  Positions; Determination Requires Community Involvement**

Civic virtues are particularly important among those empowered in the
government itself; some of this has already been alluded to in the
section on the duty of representatives. Being that representatives are
responsible to no one except themselves (and each other, to some
extent), all representatives must be of ideal moral calibre.

This is described at length in 'Abdu'l-Baha's political work _The
Secret of Divine Civilization_, which is perhaps the only book-length
work in the Baha'i Faith dedicated to political manners. In it, very
little time is spent on recommending concrete aspects of governance;
in fact, very few of the the specific recommendations in this paper
are mentione! Rather, much is written about the moral qualifications
necessary of all those who serve, legislate and work for and on behalf
of the civic government. Passages like this are typical to the tenor
of the writing:

    While the setting up of parliaments, the organizing of assemblies
    of consultation, constitutes the very foundation and bedrock of
    government, there are several essential requirements which these
    institutions must fulfill. First, the elected members must be
    righteous, God-fearing, high-minded, incorruptible. Second, they
    must be fully cognizant, in every particular, of the laws of God,
    informed as to the highest principles of law, versed in the rules
    which govern the management of internal affairs and the conduct of
    foreign relations, skilled in the useful arts of civilization, and
    content with their lawful emoluments.

    Let it not be imagined that members of this type would be
    impossible to find. Through the grace of God and His chosen ones,
    and the high endeavors of the devoted and the consecrated, every
    difficulty can be easily resolved, every problem however complex
    will prove simpler than blinking an eye.  18 

    If, however, the members of these consultative assemblies are
    inferior, ignorant, uninformed of the laws of government and
    administration, unwise, of low aim, indifferent, idle,
    self-seeking, no benefit will accrue from the organizing of such
    bodies.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, The Secret of Divine Civilization, p. 17)

And later, he writes to the same effect:

    It is unquestionable that the object in establishing parliaments
    is to bring about justice and righteousness, but everything hinges
    on the efforts of the elected representatives. If their intention
    is sincere, desirable results and unforeseen improvements will be
    forthcoming; if not, it is certain that the whole thing will be
    meaningless, the country will come to a standstill and public
    affairs will continuously deteriorate. "I see a thousand builders
    unequal to one subverter; what then of the one builder who is
    followed by a thousand subverters?"

	(Abdu'l-Baha, The Secret of Divine Civilization, p. 22)

What is notable is not the fact that these these are recommended, but
that these qualities are the _primary_ recommendations, and their lack
is a disqualifying factor. Naturally, these edits carry over to
qualities expected of those elcted to Baha'i administration; these are
based on character and capability rather than based on known
positions. Shoghi Effendi, writing of the election of delegates to the
national conventions, stated:

    ... it is incumbent upon the chosen delegates to consider without
    the least trace of passion and prejudice, and irrespective of any
    material consideration, the names of only those who can best
    combine the necessary qualities of unquestioned loyalty, of
    selfless devotion, of a well-trained mind, of recognized ability
    and mature experience. (BA 3-Jun-1925)

Other Baha'i elections are to be approached in a similar manner:

    The electors... must prayerfull and devotedly and after meditation
    and refletion elect faithful, sincere, experienced, capable and
    competent souls who are worthy of membership...

    Due regard must be paid to their actual capacity and presennt
    attainments...

    They should consider without the least trace of passion and
    prejudice, and irrespective of any material consideration, the
    names of only those who can best combine the necessary qualities
    of unquestioned loyalty, of selfless devotion, of a well-trained
    mind, of recognized ability and mature experience.

        (Translated from Persian letters from Shoghi Effendi, quoted
        from _The American Baha'i_ July/Aug 2018)

The voters should be careful to select their votes with an eye toward
electing a body that is representative of the diversity of the
community. Voters should not draw from a "favored segment," but must
vote with an eye toward having broad representation of the electorate:

    From among the pool of those whom the elector believes to be
    qualified to serve, selection should be made with due
    consideration given to such other factors as age distribution,
    diversity, and gender.
        (Letter from the Universal House of Justice to the Baha'is of
        the world, 25-Mar-2007)

Interestingly, Shoghi Effendi indicates elsewhere the necessity of
Baha'is to remain active in their communities to ensure they are
familiar enough with the community members to cast an informed vote.

    To be able to make a wise choice at the election time, it is
    necessary for him to be in close and continued contact with all
    local activities, be they teaching, administrative or otherwise,
    and to fully and whole-heartedly participate in the affairs of the
    local as well as national committees and assemblies in his
    country. It is only in this way that a believer can develop a true
    social consciousness and acquire a true sense of responsibility in
    matters affecting the interests of the Cause.
        (Shoghi Effendi, quoted in a letter from the Universal House
        of Justice to the Baha'is of the world, 25-Mar-2007)

In this manner, activity in the community is a precondition of making
an informed vote.

**Avoidance of Unitary Executive**

In contemporary governance, right down to the smallest level, there is
usually a "leader." This person, be it the prime minister, president,
mayor or chief executive, is generally the one person who is looked to
as the head of government.

No such person exists in any elected Baha'i institution. Smaller
institutions have their own officers, with their own responsibility;
e.g. a permanent chair of the meetings, a treasurer, and so
forth. These offices should not be taken as signaling someone is the
"leader" of that institution.

To make this distinction even more concrete, my understanding (based
on a visit to Haifa in 2002) is that the chairmanship of the Universal
House of Justice rotates between its members. As far as other elected
bodies, the voting process, interestingly enough, requires an actual
majority election, without nominations, for all offices. This can
frequently requires several rounds of balloting.

As such, there is a culture that seeks to avoid elevating those in the
elected bodies as being higher rank than other members of the Baha'i
Faith, in spite of their position of responsibility. This is in marked
contrast to civic society in popular culture, that generally looks at
the executive, even elected ones, as a sort of "king" who leads the
nation; it is of course far-removed from the authoritarian or fascist
ideal, which uses a cult of personality to elevate a leader beyond
questioning.

Ironically, the Baha'i writings have a special regard for kingship,
in a very specific way: Baha'u'llah himself seemed particularly
pleased with nations such as Great Britian which had devised ways of
keeping a royalty as a national symbol while limiting its
powers. However, even this may be reading too much into this:
Baha'u'llah later in the same writing references the "two signs of the
maturity of mankind," one of which is that no man will be willing to
bear the weight of kingship.

Baha'is reading will probably note one obvious omitted trait of
the Administrative order that would seem to undercut this point. One
unusual feature of the Baha'i Faith is that the lack of a unitary
executive has historically not been a feature of the Baha'i
Faith. Instead, 'Abdu'l-Baha, in his
will and testament, created the "Guardianship" rather than call for
the election of the Universal House of Justice. This was seen as
having a complimentary role to the Universal House of Justice, but the
Guardian, as he existed, was for all intents and purposes the center
of the Baha'i Faith. However, the Guardianship as a living source of
authority ended in 1957 when the sole Guardian, Shoghi Effendi, died
without a replacement. In the sixty-one years that have followed, no
single individual has never directed the affairs of the Baha'i Faith.

**Complete Ban on Campaigning, Electioneering, Block Voting and
  Political Parties**

Indeed, the whole voting system is determined to keep such political
issues from even being considered. Again, Shoghi Effendi:

    Let them exercise the utmost vigilance so that the elections are
    carried out freely, universally and by secret ballot. Any form of
    intrigue, deception, collusion and compulsion must be stopped and
    is forbidden.

    Beware, beware lest the foul odour of the parties and
    peoples... and their pernicious methods such as intrigues, party
    politics and propaganda - practices which are abhorrent even in
    name - should ever reach the Baha'i community, exercise any
    influence whatsoever upon the friends and thus bring all
    spirituality to naught. The friends should, through their
    devotion, love, loualty and altruism, abolish these evil
    practices, not imitate them. It is only after the friends
    completely ignore and sanctify themselves from these evils, that
    the spirit of God can penetrate and operate in the body of
    humanity, and in the Baha'i community.

In such an environment, not only is voting based on expressed
positions discouraged, but it is difficult to do so in an informed
manner even if one wishes to do so. In fact, not only is
electioneering frowned upon, it is not considered seemly to even
mention individuals in connection with elected posts:

    One's vote should be kept confidential. It is not permissible to
    make any reference whatsoever to individual names. The friends
    must avoid the evil methods and detestable practices of the
    politicians. They must turn completely to God, and with a purity
    of motive, a freedom of spirit and a sanctity of heart,
    participate in the elections; otherwise the outcome will be chaos
    and confusion, serious difficulties will ensue, mischief will
    abound and the confirmation of God will be cut off.

    (Shoghi Effendi, translation of letter dated January 16, 1932, to
    Persian believers in "Extracts from the Guardian's Letters on the
    Spiritual Character of Bahá'í Elections," p. 2; from NSA USA
    _Developing Distinctive Baha'i Communities_)

**Necessity of Proper Control of Election Environment**

Baha'i voting takes place in a prayerful, reverent atmosphere. This is
not novel; civic institutions frequently attempt to generate the same
well-ordered atmosphere. In Baha'i elections, there is an explicitly
spiritual atmosphere that always accompanies such activity. Indeed,
this must inform the attitude of the voter:

    On the election day, the firends must whole-heartedly participate
    in the elections, in unity and amity, turning their hearts to God,
    detached from all things but Him, seeking His guidance and
    supplicating His aid and bounty.
        (Letter written on behalf of Shoghi Effendi 27-Feb-1923)

**Plurality Voting for Governing Representatives, Without Nominations**

As regards to plurality voting and voting without nominations: while
Baha'is are used to doing this, it is worth pointing out exactly how
novel this is. It is also not an unchangeable requirement. It is what
was settled on during the early Assembly formation prior even to
Shoghi Effendi:

    I have consequently refrained from establishing a settled and
    uniform procedure for the election of the Assemblies of the East
    and the West, leaving them free to pursue their own methods of
    procedure which in most cases had been instituted and practiced
    during the last two decades of the life of Abdu'l-Baha.

    The general practice prevailing throughout the East is the one
    based upon the principle of plurality rather than absolute
    majority, whereby those candidates that have obtained the highest
    number of votes, irrespective of the fact whether they command an
    absolute majority of the votes cast or not, are automatically and
    definitely elected. It has been felt, with no little
    justification, that this method, admittedly disadvantageous in its
    disregard of the principle that requires that each elected member
    must secure a majority of the votes cast, does away on the other
    hand with the more serious disadvantage of restricting the freedom
    of the elector who, unhampered and unconstrained by electoral
    necessities, is called upon to vote for none but those whom prayer
    and reflection have inspired him to uphold. Moreover, the practice
    of nomination, so detrimental to the atmosphere of a silent and
    prayerful election, is viewed with mistrust inasmuch as it gives
    the right to the majority of a body that, in itself under the
    present circumstances, often constitutes a minority of all the
    elected delegates, to deny that God-given right of every elector
    to vote only in favor of those who he is conscientiously convinced
    are the most worthy candidates. Should this simple system be
    provisionally adopted, it would safeguard the spiritual principle
    of the unfettered freedom of the voter, who will thus preserve
    intact the sanctity of the choice he first made. It would avoid
    the inconvenience of securing advance nominations from absent
    delegates, and the impracticality of associating them with the
    assembled electors in the subsequent ballots that are often
    required to meet the exigencies of majority vote.

Note that this is made primarily for reasons of "freedom of
conscience." There are other reasons for this that will be described
later. Interestingly, Shoghi Effendi did not dictate this process, but
suggested it to the community:

    I would recommend these observations to your earnest
    consideration, and whatever decision you arrive at, all local
    Assemblies and individual believers, I am certain, will uphold,
    for their spiritual obligation and privilege is not only to
    consult freely and frequently with the National Spiritual
    Assembly, but to uphold as well with <p137> confidence and
    cheerfulness whatever is the considered verdict of their national
    representatives. (BA 27-May-1926)

To this author, these arrangements seem to have been provisional in
nature. However, I am aware of no effort by the institutions to ever
change this, and this author certainly cannot ever recall this subject
ever being brought up in a consultation! Since Shoghi Effendy did not
indicate this as a requirement, one supposes the Universal House of Justice
is free to change such practices. Note that any such change will be provisional,
as it could later be reversed. Perhaps the reason Shoghi Effendi
stated this was because he wished it to take this form initially, but
not tie the hands of the Universal House of Justice in the future. In
any case, it remains the law throughout the Baha'i community.

In any event, it is clear Shoghi Effendi favored this, particularly
the lack of nominations:

    As to the practice of nomination on Bahá'í elections, this the
    Guardian firmly believes to be in fundamental dis-accord with the
    spirit which should animate and direct all elections held by the
    Bahá'ís, be they of a local or national character and
    importance. It is, indeed, the absence of such a practice that
    constitutes the distinguishing feature and the marked superiority
    of the Bahá'í electoral methods over those commonly associated
    with political parties and factions. The practice of nomination
    being thus contrary to the spirit of Bahá'í Administration should
    be totally discarded by all the friends. For otherwise the freedom
    of the Bahá'í elector in choosing the members of any Bahá'í
    Assembly will be seriously endangered leaving the way open for the
    domination of personalities. Not only that; but the mere act of
    nomination leads eventually to the formation of parties a thing
    which is totally alien to the spirit of the Cause.

       (From a letter written on behalf of Shoghi Effendi to an
       individual believer, February 4, 1935; quoted in _Lights of
       Guidance_, p. 9)

As regards to why plurality is favored, one possibility may be to guarantee
a representation of a divers set of elected officials.  Note the
emphasis placed on electors to vote for representatives that represent
the diversity of the community. While there is no concept of "identity
politics," electors cannot be unaware of the need to have
representation of the diversity of the community. Indeed, Shoghi
Effendi has stated that in the case of a tie vote in an election, if
one person represents a "minority," the tie should be decided in favor
of that person:

    ... every organized community enlisted under the banner of
    Bahá'u'lláh should feel it to be its first and inescapable
    obligation to nurture, encourage, and safeguard every minority
    belonging to any Faith, race, class or nation within it. So great
    and vital is this principle that in such circumstances as when an
    equal number of ballots have been cast in an election, or where
    the qualifications for any office are balanced as between the
    various races, Faiths or nationalities within the community
    priority should unhesitatingly be accorded the party representing
    the minority and this for no other reason except to stimulate and
    encourage it and afford it an opportunity to further the interests
    of the community.

	(Shoghi Effendi, _The Advent of Divine Justice_ pp. 28-29)


**Immutability of Certain Features Combined With Ease of Changing Governing Structures**

Most governing bodies have constitutions. Constitutions are important
because they describe not only how the structure of government, but
how it may change in the future in an ordered manner.

The Baha'i Faith is unusual from this respect. The Universal House of
Justice has a constitution. The national bodies generally have their
own constitutions as well, to bring them in conformance with secular
codes. However, what is unusual is the process for change.

* Features laid down by the certain central figures of The Faith
  cannot be changed, as they are considered central to The Faith
  itself. This writing has concentrated on just those features. All of
  these features, except, arguably, certain points in the election
  process, are fixed and unchangeable.

* However, anything else is flexible and can be changed through a
  majority vote by the primary governing body (the Universal House of
  Justice).

This is noteable because if you limit your concerns only those bodies
completely described by the writings of the central figures, such
bodies are far too embryonic to completely elaborate the full
governing structure. For instance, the assemblies are legislative, and
perhaps to some extent, judicial arms of government. Discussion of an
executive branch is entirely lacking. As a result, even medium-sized Baha'i
assemblies are supplimented with various committees and groups that
carry out assembly decisions. All of these are created by the
assemblies and can be changed through consultation.

This includes the supreme institutions of the Baha'i Faith, who have
brought into being institutions such as the appointed counselors and
auxiliary boards, regional institutions, and recently, the various
learning institutions. As such, the full scope of Baha'i governance is far more
complex than that laid down in this writing; as these are pragmatic
structures that may change, I have not attempted to analyze these for
lessons in secular governance.

The result is the ability to change governing institutions easily,
based on the needs of the day. Shoghi Effendi has written with respect
to this:

    ... whatever is deemed necessary to incorporate into it in order
    to keep it in the forefront of all progressive movements, can,
    according to the provisions made by Baha'u'llah, be safely
    embodied therein. To this testify the words of Baha'u'llah, as
    recorded in the Eighth Leaf of the exalted Paradise: "It is
    incumbent upon the Trustees of the House of Justice to take
    counsel together regarding those things which have not outwardly
    been revealed in the Book, and to enforce that which is agreeable
    to them. God will verily inspire them with whatsoever He willeth,
    and He, verily, is the Provider, the Omniscient." Not only has the
    House of Justice been invested by Baha'u'llah with the authority
    to legislate whatsoever has not been explicitly and outwardly
    recorded in His holy Writ, upon it has also been conferred by the
    Will and Testament of Abdu'l-Baha the right and power to abrogate,
    according to the changes and requirements of the time, whatever
    has been already enacted and enforced by a preceding House of
    Justice. (21-Mar-1930)

So there is no amendment process, as such; the core principles and
certain elements are fixed and unchangeable, but everything in their
implementation may be changed as a regular act of law. There are other
safeguards in place to prevent this.

**Emphasis on Universal Participation in the Franchise**

Far from any interest to narrow or cherry-pick the electorate, it is
seen as a mandate to ensure as close to universal participation in the
franchise as possible:

    The universal participation of the blievers in every aspect of the
    faith... will endow the Baha'i community with such strenght that
    it can overcome the forces of spiritual disintegration which are
    engulfing the non-Baha'i world, and can become an ociean of
    oneness that will cover the face of the planet.

        (letter from the Universal House of Justice to the followers
        of Baha'u'llah in every land, 29-Dec-1970)

In particular, all Baha'is "in good standing" are encouraged to take
part in deliberations of The Faith and exercise their voting
franchise. Absentee voting is accepted as a matter of course. This is
a marked contrast to secular governance, where it is often felt
politically acceptable to make it harder for certain segments of
society to exercise the franchise.

There are, of course, exceptions to this. "Loss of voting rights" is a
sanction sometimes applied to Baha'is, but these are for sactions of a
serious matter. It seems evident that it is impermissible to revoke
voting rights or make it difficult to vote simply because one is in a
group disfavored by the governing authorities.

**Indirect Election of Secondary and Tertiary Representatives**

The local assemblies are elected through direct elections by all
community members in good standing. Not only are such members directly
elected, but they get a steady stream of input from the community in
the form of resolutions and recommendations from the nineteen-day
feast.

However, at the level of the secondary (national) and tertiary (House
of Justice) levels, the bodies are elected through indirect
elections. This is laid out in Abdu'l-Baha's Will and Testament:

    And now, concerning the House of Justice which God hath ordained
    as the source of all good and freed from all error, it must be
    elected by universal suffrage, that is, by the believers... By
    this House is meant the Universal House of Justice, that is, in
    all countries, a secondary House of Justice must be instituted,
    and these secondary Houses of Justice must elect the members of
    the Universal one. (WTAB)

These secondary Houses of Justice themselves are elected by delegates,
but these delegates represent districts based on proportional
representation, rather than by assembly. Per Shoghi Effendi:

    ...were the local
    Spiritual Assemblies, the number of whose members is strictly
    confined to <p85> nine, to elect directly the members of the
    National Spiritual Assembly -- thus maintaining the principle of a
    three-stage election -- all Baha'i localities, which must
    necessarily differ in numerical strength, would then have to share
    equally in the election of the National Spiritual Assembly -- a
    practice which would be contrary to fairness and
    justice. (BA 12-May-1925)

This is not happenstance; it appears Abdu'l-Baha himself was drawn
towards indirect elections for positions of importance. Consider this excerpt,
from _Star of the West_:

   Someone else asked regarding election and whether the country
   should be ruled by the people or by the wise ones among the people.
   
   'Abdu'l-Bahá answered: "It is evident that it is better if the
   people elect the noble ones among them, and then these elect the
   president of the republic. That is to say, the president should be
   the elect of the elect, because the public in general are not as
   well informed as they should be in regard to political affairs. The
   common people follow fame. In reality, whatever affair the wise
   people desire to execute, the common people agree to. The affairs
   should be in the hands of the wise and not of the common
   people. But the wise people must be in the utmost faithfulness and
   sincerity of purpose; they must serve all the people, and protect
   and safeguard their welfare. Consider, if you put the general
   affairs into the hands of the common people they will be ruined. If
   you put all the work into the hands of the labourer the house will
   not be built. A wise architect is needed. The work is done by the
   architect, but the common labourer suffers the hardships. The
   general draws the map of war, but the common people do the
   fighting. We cannot give them the map. Is it possible to leave a
   regiment in the hands of a soldier? But if we want to be victorious
   and conquerors, a wise, experienced person must be made commander."

	(SOW - Star of the West, Star of the West -  4)

**Limited Transparency in Deliberations**

Minutes of meetings are kept, but the courses of deliberations are
held in confidence and are not released. The reason is to ensure that
Baha'is express themselves freely:

    Let us also remember that at the very root of the Cause lies the
    principle of the undoubted right of the individual to
    self-expression, his freedom to declare his conscience and set
    forth his views. (BA 23-Feb-1924)

For this reason, it is generally not possible for non-Baha'is to
observe the deliberations of a governing body during
deliberations. Indeed, other Baha'is are generally not invited into
these deliberations, unless they specifically are being consulted with
on a matter of joint concern. This author clearly remembers from his
Baha'i prilgrimage the light outside the chamber where the Universal
House of Justice does its deliberations; when the light is on,
deliberations have begun, and one cannot enter the chamber then.

Minutes are to be kept to justify decisions and provide limited
transparency; they are not to be used to state who has expressed a
particular view. See the following reference regarding the meetings of
a National Spiritual Assembly:

    The purpose of the minutes is to record the action of the Assembly
    with sufficient back-ground information so that one reading the
    minutes will understand the reason for the action. National
    Assemblies may find it helpful if the background and the action
    are separated and not typed together. On the other hand, minutes
    should not be a verbatim report of the National Assembly meeting,
    and *it is not the purpose of the minutes to record the views of
    individual members. Names of individual making motions need not be
    recorded.* Names should be included, however, whenever required
    to make clear the assignments of persons responsible for
    actions."

        (From a letter of the Universal House of Justice to all
        National Spiritual Assemblies, May 27, 1970; emphasis by editor)

	(Compilations, Lights of Guidance, p. 30)

Note that this in no way means that governing bodies can use this as
an excuse to make decision-making opaque or paper over issues that
should be consulted on with the general community:

    Every institution in the Faith has certain matters which it
    considers should be kept confidential, and any member who is privy
    to such confidential information is obliged to preserve the
    confidentiality within the institution where he learned it. Such
    matters, however, are but a small portion of the business of any
    Bahá'í institution. Most subjects dealt with are of common
    interest and can be discussed openly with anyone. **Where no
    confidentiality is involved the institutions must strive to avoid
    the stifling atmosphere of secrecy**; on the other hand, every
    believer must know that he can confide a personal problem to an
    institution of the Faith, with the assurance that knowledge of the
    matter will remain confidential.

    Within the above general guideline, National Assemblies are free
    to adopt whatever provisions they deem necessary, suitable to the
    needs of their community, without creating unnecessary censorship
    on the channel of communication with the friends.

        (1 January 1984 on behalf of the Universal House of Justice to
        a National Spiritual Assembly, quoted in letter of 1996 Aug
        02, Confidentiality and Spiritual Assemblies, p. 2. Emphasis
        added by the editor)

**Emphasis on Decentralization and Federalism**

As much as possible, the secondary Houses of Justice should be
independent as possible, from interference from any other governing body:

    Moreover, the central principle guiding for the present
    the administration of the Cause has been to make the Baha'i
    National Spiritual Assemblies as independent as possible in the
    conduct of such affairs as fall within their province, and to
    lessen the hampering influence of any institution within their
    jurisdiction that might, whether directly or indirectly, impair
    their authority and prestige. (BA 12-May-1925)

While the Universal House of Justice remains the final authority, this
particular passage from Shoghi Effendi seems to warn against an
excessive involvement which would "hamper" the secondary institutions.

Likewise the secondary institutions must maintain their own balance:

    They should, within the limits imposed upon them by present-day
    circumstances, endeavor to maintain the balance in such a manner
    that the evils of over-centralization which clog, confuse and in
    the long run depreciate the value of the Baha'i services rendered
    shall on one hand be entirely avoided, and on the other the perils
    of utter decentralization with the consequent lapse of governing
    authority from the hands of the national representatives of the
    believers definitely averted. (BA 18-Oct-1927)

A similar tradeoff is given in the use of committees and andvisory
bodies in the same letter, advising them not to grant "undue
discretion to bodies that should be regarded in no other light than
that of expert advisers and executive assistants." But the primary
point is given: centralization is a problem.

In general, however, this is a point of moderation, and there is
certainly no ability of Local Spiritual Assemblies to act
independently without review. This is a matter of principle, not
pragmatics.

On the other hand, elected assemblies may not delegate their own
decision-making powers to their own appointed committees. For
instance, the following was written with respect to a national body:

    Any tendencies towards decentralization, or the delegation of
    authority to any person or body to make decisions on matters which
    directly and solely concern the National Spiritual Assembly
    itself, would be harmful and should be checked at the very outset.

        (From a letter dated 28 January 1939 written on behalf of
        Shoghi Effendi to the National Spiritual Assembly of the
        United States and Canada)

In particular, the appeals process means that decisions of local
assemblies may always be overruled by a national assembly, and that of
a national assembly by the Universal House of Justice. So from this
point of view, this is a subsidiary relationship rather than one of
equality. However, in practice, the bulk of all ordinary decisions are
made at the lowest level practical.

**Importance of Civic Virtues**

A final point is easy to overlook, but it must be emphasized. The
Baha'i Faith is a religious institution. The Baha'i governing bodies
cannot in any way be divoriced from the virtues that are inculcated by
membership in the Baha'i Faith.

It should be noted that the Baha'i Faith in no way labels any
particular virtue as being "civic." Like presumably most religions,
virtues stand on their own, and a practicing believer is presumed to
exhibit the same virtues in practicing his civic affairs as in his
personal and professional affairs. For example, it is a poor Christian
who practices honesty in his personal and professional affairs, yet
discards it in performing his civic duties.

However, this does not mean all virtues are equally important in
conduct as a good citizen.  To this end, author Brian Aull has
identified certain virtues that are seen as particularly important by
the Baha'i Faith for effective governance. These are applicable not
only for Baha'is, but as necessary requirements of good
citizenship. He refers to these virtues as a triad:
 * service
 * learning
 * community
 
Additionally, he identifies others that are particularly
important. Trustworthiness, described as "the foundation of all
virtues" in the Baha'i Faith, is seen as particularly important for
anyone in civic life, particularly elected representatives. And in
North America, the particular challenge of rascism is strong enough
that good citizens should be especially aware of this in their conduct
and in the positions they choose to espouse.

Indeed, many of the mechaisms of the Baha'i Administrative Order would
not work without this emphasis on civic virtues. Consultation would
not work without the necessary attitude of respect and humanity
towards those we disagree with, and would result in an unbroken series
of rancorous majority-only decisions. Block-voting and collusion would
undermine the plurality voting system and destroy any hope for
representative assemblies. The limited transparency necessary for an
open uncensored exchange of ideas would give way to secrecy. The fixed
and fluid nature of the executive would mean that every change of
power would result in thoughtless arbitrary changes in the executive
and other adjunct institutions. While this author hopes that all of
these principles can be brought to bear on contemporary civic
governance, this principle is perhaps the most important.


## Historical Parallels: Rule By Jury (Sortition)

I have tended to use the phrase "participative democracy" when
describing the Baha'i governing system. Let no one doubt - the Baha'i
Administrative Order **is** a democracy. However, it is unusual enough
that one may legitimately consider it as an entirely new structure.

However, there is one historical structure that this has some elements
in common with - the rule by "sortition," or rule by jury. The best
known example is that of certain Greek communities of antiquity, where
rulers were drawn from citizens by lots.


## Caveats for Learning

Before discussing what the Baha'i Faith has to offer in this area,
there are some important caveats that need to be acknowledged. This is
important to prevent recommending practices that may not work in
secular settings.

While Baha'i Faith has much to offer on the issue of participative
governance, it is important to note this is not the primary purpose of
the Baha'i Faith. It addresses this issue extensively, insofar as it
serve the purpose of "creating an ever-advancing civilization."
However, the Baha'i Faith itself cannot be confused with a political system,
or even a movement of social reform, much as it can contribute to
those areas.

A first point is that the Baha'i Institutions, as they currently
exists, are primary spiritual instatutions for the propagation and
protection of The Faith. As such, they are limited in both the power
and sphere of operation. While this does not mean it is impractical to
look at Baha'i governance and decision-making as a model, it
does mean that certain values and ethical mores that are taken for
granted in Baha'i governance cannot be presumed to exist in
secular political solutions. This means any civic or secular
institution adopting these may wish to enforce safeguards that do not
exist in the Baha'i Faith.

For instance, the fact that elections must take place in an atmosphere
of reverent reflection and prayer is seen as central to governance,
and electioneering is prohibited at voting. Having been a voter for
over thirty years, I can confidently say the elections in the USA also
take place in a quiet, respectful environment. However, this is not
just because Americans are unusually polite. Electioneering in Baha'i
voting is so unthinkable that controls are rarely thought of as
necessary. However, in civic elections in the United States, there are
usually law enforcement officials plainly visible who will slap
handcuffs on anyone who don't stay outside of the orange pylons at the
polling booth when handing out pamphlets.

This means we need to cast a more skeptical eye on practices that
could be easy to corrupt due to bad faith and agency concerns. For
instance, the diversity necessary for proper selection of Spiritual
Assemblies requires plurality voting, which requires that everyone
take to heart Shoghi Effendi's warnings against corruption, collusion,
partisan politics and formation of blocs. One reason plurality voting
is probably rare is it is so easily frustrated by the use of "block
voting" by groups within organizations. Wispering campaigns could be
used to target elected members, perhaps initiated by electees who wish
to drive out a member with unknown views. Members could likewise
selectively leak their opposition to initiatives sponsored by their
own bodies, to limit its effectiveness. This does not mean that
secular governance cannot learn from the Baha'i Faith, but it does
mean that additional safeguards not practiced by Baha'is must be
introduced.

A final point is that Baha'i governance is presumed to be weilded by
those who care about the Baha'i Faith. This is so obvious you may
wonder why I'm saying this. But in this day and age, it seems obvious
that one can adopt a political position of _intentionally_ ruining the
government for one's own reasons. Someone may gain control of
institutions in order to force them into inefficiency, providing an
excuse to set up new institutions tailored to one's own liking. Or
someone who wishes to weaken the power of civic governance may find it
easy to run things exremely badly and inefficiently, essentially
wrecking things for everyone, than to have an honest debate about
any presumed excesses of civic governance.

## Lessons for Governance

As discussed, the Baha'i Faith embeds a number of ideas in its
governance. One may borrow one or some of these elements to improve
democratic institutions. Baha'is may point out
that this is intended as an organic whole; critics may point out that
this is fine for the organization for which it was developed; e.g. a
religious organization. But as Baha'is, we beliefe that not only is it
an ideal mechanism for us, but it serves as a model for the
world. Being that it is unrealistic that any civic organization would
pick up on this in its entirety, it should certainly be reasonable to
expect that it can be used to improve certain governance. As Baha'is,
we hope that not only can it be used as an improvement, but that it
can serve as a guiding principles for new forms of governance to take
us beyond the majoritarian representation democracies that are
accepted as givens throughout the world.

1. Importance of nonpartisan consultative deliberation, and consensus
decision-making as strongly-preferred ideal.

2. Representatives work on behalf of organization as a whole, rather
than constituents.

3. Voter selection of elected represtatives based on character,
deliberative abilities, and ability to listen.

4. Lack of a unitary executive or sole person as leader.

5. Ban on political parties and factions.

6. No campaigning and electioneering; ban on block
voting.

7. Proper control of election environment; emphasis on ease of
voting. Goal of 100% participation.

8. Representatives selected in a manner to represent diverity of
views (e.g. proportional representation, sortition, etc.).

9. Minimal consitituion focusing on rulemaking body. Legislature can
change executive, but is not free in any way to amend core principles.

10. Indirect elections of regional, national and international bodies.

11. Limited transparency of deliberations to ensure frank exchange of
views.

12. Importance of educating all in civic virtues.

13. Emphasis on decentralization; federalism.

From the above, we have a number of recommendations that can be used
to improve civic governance, from small organizations, to regional
goverments up to nation-states themselves. Outside of the context of
the Baha'i Faith, it is interesting to speculate which ones may be of
use, and which ones require use in tandem with others in order to
prevent corruption.

### For Voluntary Organizations, Nonprofits, Corporations


### For Civic Governance


# Concluding notes


# Endnotes and Appendices

(1) Much as alternatives to our current form of democracy are so
unappealing that it is resigned to as a given, the capitalistic
economy is also accepted as a given. The failed
alternative economies of the late twentieth century all posed very
similar alternatives - that of massive state control. Marxist
governments imposed this for theoretical reasons; other regimes, be
they fascist, military juntas or other states imposted state control
out of convenience, all the better to confiscate the goods necessary
to pay off supporters and members of favored classes. Since all forms
relied on excessive state control, all suffered the same general
problems.  State control caused such economies to develope
inefficiencies that made them unable to compete with capitalistic
alternatives. Whatever one may think the root cause of collaps of
these governments was, the fact that economic inefficiencies and an
inability to compete on the world states was a crucial contributor.

The nature of these inefficiencies is debateable. The textbook
explanation is that state-controlled economies lacked the pricing
mechanisms that served to send signals throughout the economy that
kept demand and supply balanced. While that may be true, it is
possible that even more damage was caused because by placing all
control in the economy in the hands of government. By doing so, it
made the government itself the prime target for the sociopathically
greedy and the grifter. As a result, these economies were not only
inefficient, but frequently run through with corruption to the highest
levels. In any event, alternatives to capatalist economies are
generally framed in terms of _different_ capitalist models. One may
think of the United States, China and the Nordic countries as all
having different economic systems, but remarkably all of them are
identifiably capitalistic. Indeed, alternatives proposed by critics of
capitalism usually consist of heavily redistributive tax levies to
transfer wealth from the wealthy to the poor - all the while, keeping
the entire basic capitalist structure otherwise intact.

The primary problem is a lack of a practical, appealing alternative
that can work on an international scale. There are in fact,
glimmerings of alternatives for those who wish to look: social
enterpreneurs working off of grants and funding aggregators; economic
theorists testing alternate currencies; the open source software
community, where product is given away and services based on that
product are sold. Indeed, much of the wealth created today is in the
form of intellectual property, which once created, can be used by any
number of people. This fact in and of itself is enough to break
standard economic models, which are based on goods that, once produced
can only be used by a single purchaser. But as of yet, there is no
sign of an alternative to market economies as efficient models for
distribution.

(2) An important note regarding critics of The Baha'i Faith:

It is important to note from the outset that the features delimited
are looked upon with skepticism by many.  From the point of view of
someone only familiar with current civic models of government, one
that presumes representatives must represent consituents and takes
such things as political parties and coalition politics as a given,
the Baha'i Faith may look like a flawed democracy. Indeed,
there have been governments that have negatively reacted to its
structure, egged on by the accusations of those who wish The Baha'i
Faith ill. There are also those defenders of liberalism who would
otherwise be well-wishers but react negatively to unfamiliar
constructs which are seen as undemocratic. Finally there are those who
are negatively disposed toward organized religion itself and will take
any opportunity to use points of novelty to paint our administrative
organization as regressive.

Proper conceptualization of the structure of Baha'i governance is
necessary to defend Baha'i institutions from a point of
strength. There have been well-known controversies in the past thirty
years as some academics, no doubt steeped in the knowledge of
democracies and liberal norms, initiated a campaign to "fix" the
elected institutions to adhere to such forms. Indeed, well before
these controversies, the Universal House of Justice indicated the
difficulty some tendencies of thought were causing in the communities
of the west:

    We have noticed with concern evidences of a confusion of attitudes
    among some of the friends when they encounter difficulties in
    applying Bahá'í principles to questions of the day. On the one
    hand, they acknowledge their belief in Bahá'u'lláh and His
    teachings; on the other, they invoke Western liberal democratic
    practices when actions of Bahá'í institutions or of some of their
    fellow Bahá'ís do not accord with their expectations.

	(The Universal House of Justice, A Wider Horizon, Selected
	Letters 1983-1992, p. 218)

It is necessary to examine the Baha'i Faith with an open viewpoint, to
ensure that its strengths are recognized and that it is properly
understood. If one wishes to use Baha'i governance as a model and
apply its principles to secular governances, one must surely
understand the model first, rather than misclassifying it. The primary
reason for doing this enumeration was to allow other organizations and
civic governments to benefit from this model, but a secondary reason
was to make clear its benefits and help characterize its nature.  Any
recommendation to "reform" it cannot be done without acknowledging its
strengths and mechanisms. Once properly understood, such reasons for
reform may disappear; contrariwise, if after understood, reasons for
reform remain, then surely a strong case for such reform can be made
and justified in consultation with the community.

One thing that stands out from many criticism is the fact that many
reformers seem to have an ideal government already in mind: the
Popperian ideal, in which two opposed parties vie for control and
battle for favor of voters. Under such a mindset, the only problem
with contemporary governments is the need for modifications at the
margins, such as controls on election spending and a more engaged and
educated population. Unfortunately, such thinking overlooks the deep
problems with representative democracies that have become apparent
over time. Overlooked by all these reformers this is the possiblity
that there may be forms of participative governments that may be more
just and fair while being less "democratic" in the terms we know. In
this author's opinion, what is needed is less "democracy" in the
majoritarian sense, and more focus on justice and maintaining the
rights and responsibilities all citizens share.

(3) One of the most obvious points elided is some of the writings in
the Baha'i Faith concerning the relationship between church and
state. This is a issue that bears further serious analysis by scholars
within the Baha'i Faith.

This author has found that within the Baha'i Faith, there are a wide
variety of beliefs of how this relationship may develop over
time. Some believe that the Baha'i Administrative order is destined
over time to become the overarching world government that the Baha'i
writings point to. Others are more skeptical, pointing to other
tablets and writings of 'Abdu'l-Baha seem to confirm that church and state
must maintain separate domains. Finally others maintain that any such
notions are so far removed from the future as to have no realistic
bearing on how Baha'is behave in their day to day lives, even in how
they present the Baha'i Faith to outsiders.

This author is of the latter view. It is easy to find many devoted
Baha'is who presume that future developments will inevitably lead to a
rebirth of the "corporate state," similar to the Catholic Church in
the time prior to Vatican I reform - a unitary merge of State and
Religion in which the Baha'i Faith's own institution of governance, as
it _currently exists_, is the central point of centralized control for
this government. There are even those who insist that this is the one
correct view. This author's honest opinion is that forcing one's view
onto such controversies is a bit like insisting on solutions to the
eventual overpopulation of our martian colonies. Much as one figures
that it will eventually require a solution, it is so far removed that
one cannot but think this is a proxy fight over something else.  The
Baha'i Faith has much to say about government, but it is a misreading
to think that _current_ institutions are anything more than an
embryonic foreshadowing of what may happen in the future. It is
tempting, but probably inappropriate at this present moment, to
envision how the involvement of Baha'i institutions will impact
secular institutions in the future.

The Baha'i Faith anticipates the formation of a world government; it
anticipates the formation over time of an entire world
commonwealth. These points are quite
explicit in Shoghi Effendi's _World Order of Baha'u'llah_:

    ... as the Baha'i Faith permeates the masses of the peoples of
    East and West, and its truth is embraced by the majority of the
    peoples of a number of the Sovereign States of the world, will the
    Universal House of Justice attain the plenitude of its power, and
    exercise, as the supreme organ of the Baha'i Commonwealth, all the
    rights, the duties, and responsibilities incumbent upon the
    world's future super-state.

Critics have used writings such as these levy against the Faith the
charge that what we seek is a new Caliphate. Baha'is have tended to
react by pointing out the noncoercive nature of Baha'i membership and
the democratic mechanism of elections, and the fact that world
government and commonwealth may mean entirely different things. What
both critics and defenders fail to realize that the institutions of
the Faith themselves are intended to evolve over time. Shoghi Effendi
gives two defenses of this accusation of trying to create a new
caliphate. His first defense, which will only resonate with believers,
is that the religious governmental structure is explicitly outlined by
our Prophet and Founder Baha'u'llah. For nonbelievers, the other
defense he gives is more meaningful:

    ... whatever is deemed necessary to incorporate into it in order
    to keep it in the forefront of all progressive movements, can,
    according to the provisions made by Baha'u'llah, be safely
    embodied therein. To this testify the words of Baha'u'llah, as
    recorded in the Eighth Leaf of the exalted Paradise: "It is
    incumbent upon the Trustees of the House of Justice to take
    counsel together regarding those things which have not outwardly
    been revealed in the Book, and to enforce that which is agreeable
    to them. God will verily inspire them with whatsoever He willeth,
    and He, verily, is the Provider, the Omniscient." Not only has the
    House of Justice been invested by Baha'u'llah with the authority
    to legislate whatsoever has not been explicitly and outwardly
    recorded in His holy Writ, upon it has also been conferred by the
    Will and Testament of Abdu'l-Baha the right and power to abrogate,
    according to the changes and requirements of the time, whatever
    has been already enacted and enforced by a preceding House of
    Justice. (21-Mar-1930)

That is, because only the framework for governance is laid
down, it is possible to make whatever changes to administrative
structure that is required going forward. Very importantly, it implies
that decisions made are never final, and prior decision is never truly
binding. This implies a level of dynamism in its structure that many
believers may not be aware of. Most Americans are used to the
near-impossibility of amending the constitution and believe it to be a
necessary part of democracy, unaware that many political scientists
consider that to be its most serious flaw. Again, Shoghi Effendi:

    Not only will the present-day Spiritual Assemblies be styled
    differently in future, but they will be enabled also to add
    to their present functions those powers, duties, and prerogatives
    necessitated by the recognition of the Faith of Baha'u'llah, not
    merely as one of the recognized religious systems of the world,
    but as the State Religion of an independent and Sovereign Power.
    (27-Feb-1929)

And similarly with regard to the institutions of that time:

    ... the whole machinery of assemblies, of committees and
    conventions is to be regarded as a means, and not an end in
    itself; that they will rise or fall according to their capacity to
    further the interests, to coordinate the activities, to apply the
    principles, to embody the ideals and execute the purpose of the
    Baha'i Faith.

While this was written in 1929, Baha'is will readly admit that this
quote covers the present-day orders of the Baha'i Faith with equal accuracy.

Unfortunately, some of the wrongheaded criticism of Baha'i
institutions and Baha'i governance has actually come from influential
academics inside the Faith working with outsiders as a bloc, to change
things more to their liking. Such critics have posed "reforms"
intended to fix what they perceive as deficiencies in the present
Baha'i administrative order. Inevitably, these reforms are all things
borrowing from present-day secular governance, things such as
nominations, guarantees of separation of church and state, and various
other things. Many Baha'i defenders were quick to reject these
reforms, seeing a campaign carried out in isolation from the greater
community. A greater flaw was that some of this campaign may have been
simply an attempt to get Baha'i institutions to conform to civic
best-practices without acknowledging that there may be good reasons
for such current practices as they exist. As stated by the Guardian:

    Let us be on our guard lest we measure too strictly the Divine
    Plan with the standard of men. I am not prepared to state that it
    agrees in principle or in method with the prevailing notions now
    uppermost in men's minds, nor that it should conform with those
    imperfect, precarious, and expedient measures feverishly resorted
    to by agitated humanity. (BA )

Meanwhile, not all of the defenders have the awareness to point out that
the institutions of the Baha'i Faith are hardly and an ideal state
themselves. Nor should they be expected to be. Perhaps some Baha'is
are offended by the idea of "reform," as they may think it implies the
fact the Baha'i Faith is imperfect. But in fact, the institutions are
themselves not finished; indeed, they are "reformed" every time a
change is introduced, such as Area Teaching committees or Regional
councils. Talking about "reform" is only a problem when such a
campaign is carried out in an orchestrated manner with help from
parties outside of the Baha'i Faith that excludes dissenting voices
from such a conversation; and this is particularly so when such efforts
bypass existing channels for suggesting change and instead are
directed to a world at large that is still quite ignorant and
suspicious about anything this Faith may offer.

The caveat, therefore, is that what the Baha'i Faith has to offer are
probably not specific structures or models for consitutions.
Instead, what it has to offer at this point are principles. We know
based on the writings that however the Administrative Order may
evolve, there are certain principles that it must conform with. It is
mainly these principles that can be used to evolve the next step in
the life of secular institutions.



---------------------------------

    The Administrative Order of the Faith of Baha'u'llah must in no
    wise be regarded as purely democratic in character inasmuch as the
    basic assumption which requires all democracies to depend
    fundamentally upon getting their mandate from the people is
    altogether lacking in this Dispensation. In the conduct of the
    administrative affairs of the Faith, in the enactment of the
    legislation necessary to supplement the laws of the Kitab-i-Aqdas,
    the members of the Universal House of Justice, it should be borne
    in mind, are not, as Baha'u'llah's utterances clearly imply,
    responsible to those whom they represent, nor are they allowed to
    be governed by the feelings, the general opinion, and even the
    convictions of the mass of the faithful, or of those who directly
    elect them. They are to follow, in a prayerful attitude, the
    dictates and promptings of their conscience. They may, indeed they
    must, acquaint themselves with the conditions prevailing among the
    community, must weigh dispassionately in their minds the merits of
    any case presented for their consideration, but must reserve for
    themselves the right of an unfettered decision. (WOB 8-Feb-1934)

    And now, concerning the House of Justice which God hath ordained
    as the source of all good and freed from all error, it must be
    elected by universal suffrage, that is, by the believers. Its
    members must be manifestations of the fear of God and daysprings
    of knowledge and understanding, must be steadfast in God's faith
    and the well-wishers of all mankind. By this House is meant the
    Universal House of Justice, that is, in all countries, a secondary
    House of Justice must be instituted, and these secondary Houses of
    Justice must elect the members of the Universal one. Unto this
    body all things must be referred. It enacteth all ordinances and
    regulations that are not to be found in the explicit Holy Text. (WTAB)

    [In order to avoid division and disruption, that the Cause may not
    fall a prey to conflicting interpretations, and lose thereby its
    purity and pristine vigor, that its affairs may be conducted with
    efficiency and promptness], it is necessary that every one should
    conscientiously take an active part in the election of these
    Assemblies, abide by their decisions, enforce their decree, and
    cooperate with them wholeheartedly in their task of stimulating
    the growth of the Movement throughout all regions. The members of
    these Assemblies, on their part, must disregard utterly their own
    likes and dislikes, their personal interests and inclinations, and
    concentrate their minds upon those measures that will conduce to
    the welfare and happiness of the Baha'i Community and promote the
    common weal. (BA 12-Mar-1923)

    Let us also remember that at the very root of the Cause lies the
    principle of the undoubted right of the individual to
    self-expression, his freedom to declare his conscience and set
    forth his views. (BA 23-Feb-1924)

    Their function [elected representatives] is not to dictate, but to
    consult, and consult not only among themselves, but as much as
    possible with the friends whom they represent. They must regard
    themselves in no other light but that of chosen instruments for a
    more efficient and dignified presentation of the Cause of
    God. They should never be led to suppose that they are the central
    ornaments of the body of the Cause, intrinsically superior to
    others in capacity or merit, and sole promoters of its teachings
    and principles. They should approach their task with extreme
    humility, and endeavor, by their open-mindedness, their high sense
    of justice and duty, their candor, their modesty, their entire
    devotion to the welfare and interests of the friends, the Cause,
    and humanity, to win, not only the confidence and the genuine
    support and respect of those whom they serve, but also their
    esteem and real affection. They must, at all times, avoid the
    spirit of exclusiveness, the atmosphere of secrecy, free
    themselves from a domineering attitude, and banish all forms of
    prejudice and passion from their deliberations. They should,
    within the limits of wise discretion, take the friends into their
    confidence, acquaint them with their plans, share with them their
    problems and anxieties, and seek their advice and counsel. And,
    when they are called upon to arrive at a certain decision, they
    should, after dispassionate, anxious and cordial consultation,
    turn to God in prayer, and with earnestness and conviction and
    courage record their vote and abide by the voice of the majority,
    which we are told by our Master to be the voice of truth, never to
    be challenged, and always to be whole-heartedly enforced. To this
    voice the friends must heartily respond, and regard it as the only
    means that can insure the protection and advancement of the
    Cause. (BA 23-Feb-1924)

    In one of His earliest Tablets, however, addressed to a friend in
    Persia, the following is expressly recorded: --

	"At whatever time all the beloved of God in each country
	appoint their delegates, and these in turn elect their
	representatives, and these representatives elect a body, that
	body shall be regarded as the Supreme Baytu'l-'Adl (Universal
	House of Justice)."

    These words clearly indicate that a three-stage election has been
    provided by Abdu'l-Baha for the formation of the International
    House of Justice, and as it is explicitly provided in His Will and
    Testament that the "Secondary House of Justice (i.e., National
    Assemblies) must elect the members of the Universal One," it is
    obvious that the members of the National Spiritual Assemblies will
    have to be indirectly elected by the body of the believers in
    their respective provinces.

    Should the appointing of the delegates be made a part of the
    functions of local Spiritual Assemblies, who are already elected
    bodies, the principle of a four-stage election would be introduced
    which would be at variance with the provisions explicitly laid
    down in the Master's Tablet. On the other hand, were the local
    Spiritual Assemblies, the number of whose members is strictly
    confined to <p85> nine, to elect directly the members of the
    National Spiritual Assembly -- thus maintaining the principle of a
    three-stage election -- all Baha'i localities, which must
    necessarily differ in numerical strength, would then have to share
    equally in the election of the National Spiritual Assembly -- a
    practice which would be contrary to fairness and
    justice. Moreover, the central principle guiding for the present
    the administration of the Cause has been to make the Baha'i
    National Spiritual Assemblies as independent as possible in the
    conduct of such affairs as fall within their province, and to
    lessen the hampering influence of any institution within their
    jurisdiction that might, whether directly or indirectly, impair
    their authority and prestige. (BA 12-May-1925)

    ... it is incumbent upon the chosen delegates to consider without
    the least trace of passion and prejudice, and irrespective of any
    material consideration, the names of only those who can best
    combine the necessary qualities of unquestioned loyalty, of
    selfless devotion, of a well-trained mind, of recognized ability
    and mature experience. (BA 3-Jun-1925)

    I have consequently refrained from establishing a settled and
    uniform procedure for the election of the Assemblies of the East
    and the West, leaving them free to pursue their own methods of
    procedure which in most cases had been instituted and practiced
    during the last two decades of the life of Abdu'l-Baha.

    The general practice prevailing throughout the East is the one
    based upon the principle of plurality rather than absolute
    majority, whereby those candidates that have obtained the highest
    number of votes, irrespective of the fact whether they command an
    absolute majority of the votes cast or not, are automatically and
    definitely elected. It has been felt, with no little
    justification, that this method, admittedly disadvantageous in its
    disregard of the principle that requires that each elected member
    must secure a majority of the votes cast, does away on the other
    hand with the more serious disadvantage of restricting the freedom
    of the elector who, unhampered and unconstrained by electoral
    necessities, is called upon to vote for none but those whom prayer
    and reflection have inspired him to uphold. Moreover, the practice
    of nomination, so detrimental to the atmosphere of a silent and
    prayerful election, is viewed with mistrust inasmuch as it gives
    the right to the majority of a body that, in itself under the
    present circumstances, often constitutes a minority of all the
    elected delegates, to deny that God-given right of every elector
    to vote only in favor of those who he is conscientiously convinced
    are the most worthy candidates. Should this simple system be
    provisionally adopted, it would safeguard the spiritual principle
    of the unfettered freedom of the voter, who will thus preserve
    intact the sanctity of the choice he first made. It would avoid
    the inconvenience of securing advance nominations from absent
    delegates, and the impracticality of associating them with the
    assembled electors in the subsequent ballots that are often
    required to meet the exigencies of majority vote.

    I would recommend these observations to your earnest
    consideration, and whatever decision you arrive at, all local
    Assemblies and individual believers, I am certain, will uphold,
    for their spiritual obligation and privilege is not only to
    consult freely and frequently with the National Spiritual
    Assembly, but to uphold as well with <p137> confidence and
    cheerfulness whatever is the considered verdict of their national
    representatives. (BA 27-May-1926)

    They should, within the limits imposed upon them by present-day
    circumstances, endeavor to maintain the balance in such a manner
    that the evils of over-centralization which clog, confuse and in
    the long run depreciate the value of the Baha'i services rendered
    shall on one hand be entirely avoided, and on the other the perils
    of utter decentralization with the consequent lapse of governing
    authority from the hands of the national representatives of the
    believers definitely averted. The absorption of the petty details
    of Baha'i administration by the personnel of the National
    Spiritual Assembly is manifestly injurious to efficiency and an
    expert discharge of Baha'i duties, whilst the granting of undue
    discretion to bodies that should be regarded in no other light
    than that of expert advisers and executive assistants would
    jeopardize the very vital and pervading powers that are the sacred
    prerogatives of bodies that in time will evolve into Baha'i
    National Houses of Justice. (BA 18-Oct-1927)

    Let it be made clear to every inquiring reader that among the most
    outstanding and sacred duties incumbent upon those who have been
    called upon to initiate, direct and coordinate the affairs of the
    Cause, are those that require them to win by every means in their
    power the confidence and affection of those whom it is their
    privilege to serve. Theirs is the duty to investigate and acquaint
    themselves with the considered views, the prevailing sentiments,
    the personal convictions of those whose welfare it is their solemn
    obligation to promote. Theirs is the duty to purge once for all
    their deliberations and the general conduct of their affairs from
    that air of self-contained aloofness, from the suspicion of
    secrecy, the stifling atmosphere of dictatorial assertiveness, in
    short, from every word and deed that might savor of partiality,
    self-centeredness and prejudice. Theirs is the duty, while
    retaining the sacred and exclusive right of final decision in
    their hands, to invite discussion, provide information, ventilate
    <p144> grievances, welcome advice from even the most humble and
    insignificant members of the Baha'i family, expose their motives,
    set forth their plans, justify their actions, revise if necessary
    their verdict, foster the spirit of individual initiative and
    enterprise, and fortify the sense of interdependence and
    co-partnership, of understanding and mutual confidence between
    them on one hand and all local Assemblies and individual believers
    on the other. (BA 18-Oct-1927)

a 1914 redux: "Inspired by ideologies ranging from an almost
    incoherent anarchism at one extreme to sharply honed racist and
    nationalist obsessions at the other, these underground forces
    shared one naïve conviction: if the particular part of the
    prevailing order that had become their target could somehow be
    brought down, the inherent nobility of the segment of humankind
    that supported their aims—or the assumed nobility of humankind in
    general—would by itself ensure a new era of freedom and
    justice. (COL)

    ... it was ‘Abdu’l‑Bahá who made certain that the Divine Order
    conceived by Bahá’u’lláh for the unification of the human race and
    the institution of justice in humanity’s collective life would be
    provided with the means required to realize its Founder’s
    purpose. For unity to exist among human beings — at even the
    simplest level — two fundamental conditions must pertain. Those
    involved must first of all be in some agreement about the nature
    of reality as it affects their relationships with one another and
    with the phenomenal world. They must, secondly, give assent to
    some recognized and authoritative means by which decisions will be
    taken that affect their association with one another and that
    determine their collective goals. 

    Unity is not, that is, merely a condition resulting from a sense
    of mutual goodwill and common purpose, however profound and
    sincerely held such sentiments may be, any more than an organism
    is a product of some fortuitous and amorphous association of
    various elements. Unity is a phenomenon of creative power, whose
    existence becomes apparent through the effects that collective
    action produces and whose absence is betrayed by the impotence of
    such efforts. However handicapped it often has been by ignorance
    and perversity, this force has been the primary influence driving
    the advancement of civilization, generating legal codes, social
    and political institutions, artistic works, technological
    achievements without end, moral breakthroughs, material
    prosperity, and long periods of public peace whose afterglow lived
    in the memories of subsequent generations as imagined “golden
    ages.” (COL)

    regarding current conditions anticipated by Shoghi Effendi: 
    The landscape of international affairs would, he said, be
    increasingly reshaped by twin forces of “integration” and
    “disintegration”, both of them ultimately beyond human control. In
    the light of what meets our eyes today, his previsioning of the
    operation of this dual process is breathtaking: the creation of “a
    mechanism of world inter-communication … functioning with
    marvellous swiftness and perfect regularity”;[62] the undermining
    of the nation-state as the chief arbiter of human destiny; the
    devastating effects that advancing moral breakdown throughout the
    world would have on social cohesion; the widespread public
    disillusionment produced by political corruption; and—
    unimaginable to others of his generation—the rise of global
    agencies dedicated to promoting human welfare, coordinating
    economic activity, defining international standards, and
    encouraging a sense of solidarity among diverse races and
    cultures. These and other developments, the Guardian explained,
    would fundamentally alter the conditions in which the Bahá’í Cause
    would pursue its mission in the decades lying ahead. (COL)
 
    As the Bahá’í community was constructing administrative
    foundations which would permit it to play an effective role in
    human affairs, the accelerating process of disintegration that
    Shoghi Effendi had discerned was undermining the fabric of social
    order. Its origins, however determinedly ignored by many social
    and political theorists, are beginning, after the lapse of several
    decades, to gain recognition at international conferences devoted
    to peace and development. In our own time, it is no longer unusual
    to encounter in such circles candid references to the essential
    role that “spiritual” and “moral” forces must play in achieving
    solutions to urgent problems (COL)

    The yearning for belief is inextinguishable, an inherent part of
    what makes one human. When it is blocked or betrayed, the rational
    soul is driven to seek some new compass point, however inadequate
    or unworthy, around which it can organize experience and dare
    again to assume the risks that are an inescapable aspect of
    life. It was in this perspective that Shoghi Effendi warned the
    members of the Faith, in unusually strong language, that they must
    try to understand the spiritual calamity engulfing a large part of
    humankind during the decades between the two world wars:
 
        God Himself has indeed been dethroned from the hearts of men,
        and an idolatrous world passionately and clamorously hails and
        worships the false gods which its own idle fancies have
        fatuously created, and its misguided hands so impiously
        exalted.… Their high priests are the politicians and the
        worldly-wise, the so-called sages of the age; their sacrifice,
        the flesh and blood of the slaughtered multitudes; their
        incantations, outworn shibboleths and insidious and irreverent
        formulas; their incense, the smoke of anguish that ascends
        from the lacerated hearts of the bereaved, the maimed, and the
        homeless.[79]
 
    Like opportunistic infections, aggressive ideologies took
    advantage of the situation created by the decline of religious
    vitality. (COL)

    Long before it and its leader had been swept into oblivion during
    the concluding months of the second world war, Fascism had become
    an object of ridicule among the majority of even those who had
    originally supported it. Its significance lies, rather, in the
    host of imitators it spawned and which were to proliferate
    throughout the world like some malignant series of mutations, in
    the decades since then. Fuelled by a manic nationalism, this
    aberration of the human spirit deified the state, discovered
    everywhere imaginary threats to the national survival of whatever
    unhappy people it had fastened upon, and preached to all who would
    listen the notion that war has an “ennobling” influence on the
    human soul. The comic opera parade of uniforms, jackboots, banners
    and trumpets usually associated with it should not conceal from a
    contemporary observer the virulent legacy it has left in our own
    age, enshrining in political vocabulary such anguished terms as
    desaparecidos (“the disappeared”). (COL)

    Like Fascism, Naziism has left a detritus in our own time. In its
    case, this takes the form of a language and symbols through which
    fringe elements in present-day society, demoralized by the
    economic and social decay around them and made desperate by the
    absence of solutions, vent their impotent rage on minorities whom
    they blame for their disappointments. (COL)

    To a degree never before imagined, let alone attempted, the
    Leninist conspiracy against human nature also sought
    systematically to extinguish faith in God. Whatever view of the
    situation political theorists may currently hold, no one can be
    surprised that such deliberate violence to the roots of human
    motivation led inexorably to the economic and political ruin of
    those societies luckless enough to fall under Soviet sway. Its
    longer-term spiritual effect, tragically, was to pervert to the
    service of its own amoral agenda the legitimate yearnings for
    freedom and justice of subject peoples throughout the world. 

    From a Bahá’í point of view, humanity’s worship of idols of its
    own invention is of importance not because of the historical
    events associated with these forces, however horrifying, but
    because of the lesson it taught. Looking back on the twilight
    world in which such diabolical forces loomed over humanity’s
    future, one must ask what was the weakness in human nature that
    rendered it vulnerable to such influences. To have seen in someone
    like Benito Mussolini the figure of a “Man of Destiny”, to have
    felt obliged to understand the racial theories of Adolf Hitler as
    anything other than the self-evident products of a diseased mind,
    to have seriously entertained the reinterpretation of human
    experience through dogmas that had given birth to the Soviet Union
    of Josef Stalin—so wilful an abandonment of reason on the part of
    a considerable segment of the intellectual leadership of society
    demands an accounting to posterity. (COL)

     What Bahá’í institutions do, rather, is to strive to align the
     work of the Cause with the Divinely impelled process they see
     steadily unfolding in the world, a process that will ultimately
     realize its purpose, regardless of historical circumstances or
     events. The challenge to the Administrative Order is to ensure
     that, as Providence allows, Bahá’í efforts are in harmony with
     this Greater Plan of God, because it is in doing so that the
     potentialities implanted in the Cause by Bahá’u’lláh bear their
     fruit. (COL)

-------------------------------

    How pathetic indeed are the efforts of those leaders of human
    institutions who, in utter disregard of the spirit of the age, are
    striving to adjust national processes, suited to the ancient days
    of self-contained nations, to an age which must either achieve the
    unity of the world, as adumbrated by Baha'u'llah, or perish. At so
    critical an hour in the history of civilization it behooves the
    leaders of all the nations of the world, great and small, whether
    in the East or in the West, whether victors or vanquished, to give
    heed to the clarion call of Baha'u'llah and, thoroughly imbued
    with a sense of <p37> world solidarity, the sine qua non of
    loyalty to His Cause, arise manfully to carry out in its entirety
    the one remedial scheme He, the Divine Physician, has prescribed
    for an ailing humanity. (WOB 28-Nov-1931)

    The call of Baha'u'llah is primarily directed against all forms of
    provincialism, all insularities and prejudices. If long-cherished
    ideals and time-honored institutions, if certain social
    assumptions and religious formulae have ceased to promote the
    welfare of the generality of mankind, if they no longer minister
    to the needs of a continually evolving humanity, let them be swept
    away and relegated to the limbo of obsolescent and forgotten
    doctrines. Why should these, in a world subject to the immutable
    law of change and decay, be exempt from the deterioration that
    must needs overtake every human institution? For legal standards,
    political and economic theories are solely designed to safeguard
    the interests of humanity as a whole, and not humanity to be
    crucified for the preservation of the integrity of any particular
    law or doctrine. (WOB 28-Nov-1931)

    The principle of the Oneness of Mankind -- the pivot round which
    all the teachings of Baha'u'llah revolve <p43> -- is no mere
    outburst of ignorant emotionalism or an expression of vague and
    pious hope... It does not constitute merely the enunciation of an
    ideal, but stands inseparably associated with an institution
    adequate to embody its truth, demonstrate its validity, and
    perpetuate its influence. It implies an organic change in the
    structure of present-day society, a change such as the world has
    not yet experienced. It constitutes a challenge, at once bold and
    universal, to outworn shibboleths of national creeds -- creeds
    that have had their day and which must, in the ordinary course of
    events as shaped and controlled by Providence, give way to a new
    gospel, fundamentally different from, and infinitely superior to,
    what the world has already conceived. It calls for no less than
    the reconstruction and the demilitarization of the whole civilized
    world -- a world organically unified in all the essential aspects
    of its life, its political machinery, its spiritual aspiration,
    its trade and finance, its script and language, and yet infinite
    in the diversity of the national characteristics of its federated
    units. (WOB 28-Nov-1931)

    Their common, their fundamental object is to insure the continuity
    of that divinely-appointed authority which flows from the Source
    of our Faith, to safeguard the unity of its followers and to
    maintain the integrity and flexibility of its teachings. Acting in
    conjunction with each other these two inseparable institutions
    administer its affairs, coordinate its activities, promote its
    interests, execute its laws and defend its subsidiary
    institutions.  (WOB 8-Feb-1934)

    This new-born Administrative Order incorporates within its
    structure certain elements which are to be found in each of the
    three recognized forms of secular government [democracy,
    autocracy/dictatorship, aristocracy/monarchy/oligarchy;
    cross-reference to Aristotle's three types], without being in any
    sense a mere replica of any one of them, and without introducing
    within its machinery any of the objectionable features which they
    inherently possess. It blends and harmonizes, as no government
    fashioned by mortal hands has as yet accomplished, the salutary
    truths which each of these systems undoubtedly contains <p153>
    without vitiating the integrity of those God-given verities on
    which it is ultimately founded. (WOB 8-Feb-1934)

    A parallel might almost be drawn between these confused and
    confusing systems of thought that are the direct outcome of the
    helplessness and confusion afflicting the Christian Faith and the
    great variety of popular cults, of fashionable and evasive
    philosophies which flourished in the opening centuries of the
    Christian Era, and which attempted to absorb and pervert the state
    religion of that Roman people. The pagan worshipers who
    constituted, at that time, the bulk of the population of the
    Western Roman Empire, found themselves surrounded, and in certain
    instances menaced, by the prevailing sect of the Neo-Platonists,
    by the followers of nature religions, by Gnostic philosophers, by
    Philonism, Mithraism, the adherents of the Alexandrian cult, and a
    multitude of kindred sects <p185> and beliefs, in much the same
    way as the defenders of the Christian Faith, the preponderating
    religion of the western world, are realizing, in the first century
    of the Baha'i Era, how their influence is being undermined by a
    flood of conflicting beliefs, practices and tendencies which their
    own bankruptcy had helped to create. It was, however, this same
    Christian Religion, which has now fallen into such a state of
    impotence, that eventually proved itself capable of sweeping away
    the institutions of paganism and of swamping and suppressing the
    cults that had flourished in that age.

	Such institutions as have strayed far from the spirit and
	teachings of Jesus Christ must of necessity, as the embryonic
	World Order of Baha'u'llah takes shape and unfolds, recede
	into the background, and make way for the progress of the
	divinely-ordained institutions that stand inextricably
	interwoven with His teachings. The indwelling Spirit of God
	which, in the Apostolic Age of the Church, animated its
	members, the pristine purity of its teachings, the primitive
	brilliancy of its light, will, no doubt, be reborn and revived
	as the inevitable consequence of this redefinition of its
	fundamental verities, and the clarification of its original
	purpose. (WOB 11-Mar-1936)

    ... the dignity and unity of the Cause urgently demands --
    particularly throughout the American continent -- that the friends
    should in their words and conduct emphasize and give absolute
    prominence to the constructive dynamic principles of Baha'u'llah,
    rather than attach undue importance to His negative Teachings. (BA
    5-Mar-1922)

    [regarding the continued necessity of publication review]
    So great
    is the importance and so supreme is the authority of these
    assemblies that once Abdu'l-Baha after having himself and in his
    own handwriting corrected the translation made into Arabic of the
    Ishraqat (the Effulgences) by Sheikh Faraj, a Kurdish friend from
    Cairo, directed him in a Tablet to submit the above-named
    translation to the Spiritual Assembly of Cairo, that he may seek
    from them before publication their approval and consent. These are
    His very words in that Tablet: -- "His honor, Sheikh Faraju'llah,
    has here rendered into Arabic with greatest care the Ishraqat and
    yet I have told him that he must submit his version to the
    Spiritual Assembly of Egypt, and I have conditioned its
    publication upon the approval of the above-named Assembly. This is
    so that things may be arranged in an orderly manner, for should it
    not be so any one may translate a certain Tablet and print and
    circulate it on his own account. Even a non-believer might
    undertake such work, and thus cause confusion and disorder. If it
    be conditioned, however, upon the approval of the Spiritual
    Assembly, a translation prepared, printed and circulated by a
    non-believer will have no recognition whatever.

    This is indeed a clear indication of the Master's express desire
    that nothing whatever should be given to the public by any
    individual among the friends, unless fully considered and approved
    by the Spiritual Assembly in his locality; and if this (as is
    undoubtedly the case) is a matter that pertains to the general
    interest of the Cause in that land, then it is incumbent upon the
    Spiritual Assembly to submit it to the consideration and approval
    of the national body representing all the various local
    assemblies. (BA 5-Mar-1922)


Adjunct Texts (from _Baha'i Administration_)

	Duties of Spiritual Assemblies

	The matter of Teaching, its direction, its ways and means, its extension, its consolidation, essential as they are to the interests of the Cause, constitute by no means the only issue which should <p38> receive the full attention of these Assemblies. A careful study of Baha'u'llah's and Abdu'l-Baha's Tablets will reveal that other duties, no less vital to the interests of the Cause, devolve upon the elected representatives of the friends in every locality. 

	It is incumbent upon them to be vigilant and cautious, discreet and watchful, and protect at all times the Temple of the Cause from the dart of the mischief-maker and the onslaught of the enemy. 

	They must endeavor to promote amity and concord amongst the friends, efface every lingering trace of distrust, coolness and estrangement from every heart, and secure in its stead an active and whole-hearted cooperation for the service of the Cause. 

	They must do their utmost to extend at all times the helping hand to the poor, the sick, the disabled, the orphan, the widow, irrespective of color, caste and creed. 

	They must promote by every means in their power the material as well as the spiritual enlightenment of youth, the means for the education of children, institute, whenever possible, Baha'i educational institutions, organize and supervise their work and provide the best means for their progress and development. 

	They must make an effort to maintain official, regular, and frequent correspondence with the various Baha'i centers throughout the world, report to them their activities, and share the glad-tidings they receive with all their fellow-workers in the Cause. 

	They must encourage and stimulate by every means at their command, through subscription, reports and articles, the development of the various Baha'i magazines, such as the "Star of the West" and the "Magazine of the Children of the Kingdom" in the United States of America, the " Baha'i News" of India, the "Sun of the East" (Khurshid-i Khavar) in Turkestan, the "Star of the East" in Japan, the "Sun of Truth" in Germany. 

	They must undertake the arrangement of the regular meetings of the friends, the feasts and the anniversaries, as well as the special gatherings designed to serve and promote the social, intellectual and spiritual interests of their fellow-men. 

	They must supervise in these days when the Cause is still in its infancy all Baha'i publications and translations, and provide in general for a dignified and accurate presentation of all Baha'i literature and its distribution to the general public. <p39> 

	These rank among the most outstanding obligations of the members of every Spiritual Assembly. In whatsoever locality the Cause has sufficiently expanded, and in order to insure efficiency and avoid confusion, each of these manifold functions will have to be referred to a special Committee, responsible to that Assembly, elected by it from among the friends in that locality, and upon whose work the Assembly will have to exercise constant and general supervision. 

	These local Spiritual Assemblies will have to be elected directly by the friends, and every declared believer of 21 years and above, far from standing aloof and assuming an indifferent or independent attitude, should regard it his sacred duty to take part conscientiously and diligently, in the election, the consolidation and the efficient working of his own local Assembly.

	National Assemblies

	Regarding the establishment of "National Assemblies," it is of vital importance that in every country, where the conditions are favorable and the number of the friends has grown and reached a considerable size, such as America, Great Britain and Germany, that a "National Spiritual Assembly" be immediately established, representative of the friends throughout that country. 

	Its immediate purpose is to stimulate, unify and coordinate by frequent personal consultations, the manifold activities of the friends as well as the local Assemblies; and by keeping in close and constant touch with the Holy Land, initiate measures, and direct in general the affairs of the Cause in that country. 

	It serves also another purpose, no less essential than the first, as in the course of time it shall evolve into the National House of Justice (referred to in Abdu'l-Baha's Will as the "secondary House of Justice"), which according to the explicit text of the Testament will have, in conjunction with the other National Assemblies throughout the Baha'i world, to elect directly the members of the International House of Justice, that Supreme Council that will guide, organize and unify the affairs of the Movement throughout the world. 

	It is expressly recorded in Abdu'l-Baha's Writings that these National Assemblies must be indirectly elected by the friends; that <p40> is, the friends in every country must elect a certain number of delegates, who in their turn will elect from among all the friends in that country the members of the National Spiritual Assembly. In such countries, therefore, as America, Great Britain and Germany, a fixed number of secondary electors must first be decided upon (95 for America, including the Pacific Islands; 95 for Germany; and 19 for Great Britain). The friends then in every locality where the number of adult declared believers exceeds nine must directly elect its quota of secondary electors assigned to it in direct proportion to its numerical strength. These secondary electors will then, either through correspondence, or preferably by gathering together, and first deliberating upon the affairs of the Cause throughout their country (as the delegates to the Convention), elect from among all the friends in that country nine who will be the members of the National Spiritual Assembly. 

	This National Spiritual Assembly, which, pending the establishment of the Universal House of Justice, will have to be re-elected once a year, obviously assumes grave responsibilities, for it has to exercise full authority over all the local Assemblies in its province, and will have to direct the activities of the friends, guard vigilantly the Cause of God, and control and supervise the affairs of the Movement in general. 

	Vital issues, affecting the interests of the Cause in that country such as the matter of translation and publication, the Mashriqu'l-Adhkar, the Teaching Work, and other similar matters that stand distinct from strictly local affairs, must be under the full jurisdiction of the National Assembly. 

	It will have to refer each of these questions, even as the local Assemblies, to a special Committee, to be elected by the members of the National Spiritual Assembly, from among all the friends in that country, which will bear to it the same relation as the local committees bear to their respective local Assemblies. 

	With it, too, rests the decision whether a certain point at issue is strictly local in its nature, and should be reserved for the consideration and decision of the local Assembly, or whether it should fall under its own province and be regarded as a matter which ought to receive its special attention. The National Spiritual Assembly will also decide upon such matters which in its opinion <p41> should be referred to the Holy Land for consultation and decision. 

	With these Assemblies, local as well as national,
	harmoniously, vigorously, and efficiently functioning
	throughout the Baha'i world, the only means for the
	establishment of the Supreme House of Justice will have been
	secured. And when this Supreme Body will have been properly
	established, it will have to consider afresh the whole
	situation, and lay down the principle which shall direct, so
	long as it deems advisable, the affairs of the Cause.

	(end of quote)

    This sad history is of importance to an understanding of the Cause
    in the twentieth century not only because of what the Guardian
    called the “havoc” it wreaked in the Holy Family, but because of
    the light it casts on the challenges the Bahá’í community will
    increasingly face in the years ahead, challenges predicted in
    explicit language by both the Master and the Guardian. Apart from
    the insincerity that marked all too many of them, the relatives of
    Shoghi Effendi demonstrated little or no awareness of the
    spiritual nature of the role conferred on him in the Will and
    Testament. That the Revelation of God to the age of humanity’s
    maturity should have brought with it, as a central feature of its
    mission, an authority essential for the restructuring of social
    order represented a spiritual challenge they seemed unable, or
    perhaps never sought, to understand. Their abandonment of the
    Guardian is a lesson that will remain with posterity down through
    the centuries of the Bahá’í Dispensation. (COL)