---
title: Of SJWs and Do-Gooder Derogation
---

# Of SJWs and Do-Gooder Derogation

Let's kick of this blog post with one of His greatest hits:

    Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake: for
    theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall
    revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil
    against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad:
    for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the
    prophets which were before you.

Yep, that's Matthew 5:10-5:12. While I'm a Baha'i, I still read the
bible on occasion, and Jesus still knows what he's talking about.

So one problem I have with "the religious" is those who read The Bible
with their preacher's eyes and not their own. Many members of the
American clergy have all sorts of versus like the above committed to
memory. For some of them, they find it convenient to cultivate a sense
of sacrifice and loyalty to their creed. But the end result, in most
cases, is to feed a persecution complex. They tell their followers
that "people may despise you, because you follow Christ." While this
may inspire conviction and loyalty, it also causes many Christians to
view themselves as bullied minorities, in spite of the fact that
Christianity continues to enjoy an unquestioned dominance in American
culture - at least as far as religion is concerned. However, and other
versus are viewed as watertight proof that numerous inconveniences
experienced by themselves and their tribe are due to the fact we live
in an anti-Christian nation. That's why their "Christian" beliefs are
under attack.

Well, no. The problem is there isn't anything uniquely Christian about
that analysis. If your interpretation is correct, than any "tribe" out
there can say the same thing about themselves. Indeed, if I were a
Muslim in America, carefully practicing my faith, I'd have actual
evidence to back up my experience. I believe that if Jesus taught
something, it is true for *all* men, not just those who clamorously
assert allegiance to his cause. If you believe, as I, that
"righteousness" is a case of doing good morally even when it's
difficult, and not simply a description of adherence to a creed one
choses freely, then this has quite a different meaning.

He seems to be saying that righteous people are disliked. Note he
didn't say "self-righteous" - he said righteous. If you don't like the
"biblical" language here, think "virtuous." Unfortunately, we can all
think of times people are disliked due to virtuous behavior. Why is that?

It well be human nature. It's no surprise that psychologists are
uncovering terms like [do-gooder derogation]() and [antisocial
punishment(). Basically, if you are viewed as "too good," you will be
punished socially by people. Not everyone - but a large enough
minority to notice. My guess is that people who read this quote from
Jesus and thought "Oh, if they hate me, it's because I'm a
Christian..." haven't... quite... tried to be enough of a good person
for themselves to be a victim. Instead, the victims tend to be, well,
do-gooders - frequently the humblest of people. Indeed, the sorts of
people who draw do-gooder derogation are probably the sorts of
people you would never have reason to find contempt for. If they sense
others dislike for them, they would immediately try to figure out what
*they* did wrong, rather than think that maybe they did nothing wrong
at all.

So what is antisocial punishment, or do-gooder derogation? Well, it
has to be an informal sanction for behavior place on people who
certain others believe are, well, too good. 

Does this happen to me? Well, no, not really. I don't think of myself
as being so fantastic or voluble in nature that I would think to draw
that sort of attention to myself. Of course, the nature of such
sanction is that people won't be told about it directly in any case!
You'll just find yourself slowly edged out of social circles; others
will talk behind your back; you'll be a victim of fault finding that
would otherwise not occur; basically, you'll be viewed as less likeable.