---
title: On Effective Dialogues
---

# On Effective Dialogues

Usually, I write about two subjects, which frequently have nothing to
do with each other - the Baha'i Faith (or, more broadly, philosophy),
and my work as a Software Developer and occasional
leader-by-default. This is one of the rare columns that is equally
applicable in both contexts.

The subject is: how to have rational dialogues. If you've been around
the block in leadership roles, or have plenty of experience in
cooperative leadership or participative democracy, this is an old hat
to you. But hopefull this will inform everyone.

About "effective" or "rational": I don't mean arguments that play out
like Socratic dialogs, where everyone uses rigorous logic. I'm just
talking about a dialog where everyone has different opinions, but are
still trying to get work done. So in this context, "effective" means
focused on some distinct topic, and "rational" means one in which
everyone keeps their head and focuses on listening rather than
reacting based on whatever emotional reaction someone had. Not one
that excludes emotion, but allows everyone to contribute even if there
are negative emotions involved.

I'm also going to focus on habits and internal attitudes - the things
YOU bring to the table. There is only one person whose behavior you
can change, and that is the person you should focus on: yourelf. And
there are lots of things you can do to help things stay rational and
productive. While some of this is based in writings of the Baha'i
Faith, a lot of it is due to general management advice that is buried
or easily forgotten. People in their professional lives frequently
overlook the solid advice that isn't couched in professional terms -
anything from a religious lecture to advice from your canny
uncle. This is applicable to Baha'i communities too:, people in Baha'i
circles often take for granted that everyone's committment to the
Baha'i Faith mean that disagreements will work themselves out
properly. Indeed, these works for any organization dedicated to the
greater good.

So here's the items:

** ASSUME POSITIVE INTENT **

This one is probably the most important point, and one almost everyone
needs to have in any productive community dialog. Assume that everyone
wants what is best for the community and is working along the same
goals, and keep that in mind in any discourse.

It is human nature to divide people into friends and enemies -
people you get along with great go in the former camp, and the latter
to be populated by anyone you feel is out to get you or rubbed you the
wrong way. Unfortunately, in any dialog, you're going to get people
rubbing you the wrong way through nothing more serious than
incompatible personalities.

A point in the Baha'i Writings is particularly clear on this subject:

    Do not see any enemies... Be mindful that you do not consider him
    as an enemy and simply tolerate him, for that is but stratagem and
    hypocrisy. To consider a man your enemy and love him is
    hypocrisy. This is not becoming of any soul. You must behold him
    as a friend. You must treat him well.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, The Promulgation of Universal Peace, p. 267)

This does not mean that you will never have ill-wishers, or that the
community will never have ill-wishers; more on that later. Instead,
what it means is if you have to curb a natural tendency to see anyone
you don't like or who seems to have antipathy as your automatic
enemy. Doing so will lead you to subconsciously want to "defeat" this
person in the dialog.  Focus on why you are having the dialog and
presume this person has the same goals as you.


** AVOID PERSONAL PRONOUNS **

This is a really good tip from email corespondence, but to some extent
it works whenever you are addressing a group.
Minimize overuse of the personal pronouns: "you," "I,"
"them" and so forth.

This seems like an odd recommendation. Wouldn't this lead to stilted
speech? If it helps, you can think of it as a bit like the etiquette
guideline "don't touch your face in public," in that usually when you
do that, it's easy to do something rude or gross.

Each pronoun is a bit problematic. Use "I" too much, and the focus of
the discussion is, quite naturally, on you. Use of "you" may make
someone else singled out. Use of "you" in the collective or "them"
will define a group as "the other."

That pretty much leaves "we," but you have to be careful of its
misuse. If you use "we" to describe what everyone should do or how
everyone should feel, you might be falling into "the royal we," where
you are presuming to speak for the collective without permission; or
many times, "we" is just a synonym for "everyone else here but me,"
spoken in frustration of group behaviors the speaker doesn't like.

Obviously you can't do without pronouns - which is why the guideline
says "avoid," not "never." But it does mean that you need to speak
carefully when using them.

** AVOID MAKING EMBEDDED ASSUMPTIONS IN YOUR STATEMENTS **

I have buried in my stacks an old classic book called _The Gentle Art
of Verbal Self-Defense_. In it, the writer gives an assessment of
certain forms of lightweight verbal abuse, and how to deflect it so
you can walk away with your dignity intact without it spiraling into
an argument. I generally don't recommend this book indiscriminantly,
because it's too easy to take this stuff the wrong way and violate the
"assume positive intent" guideline above. I once lent it to a roommate
who read it, and we had a worse relationship for it, as from that
point on, he attempted to perform verbal judo on any request I had for
him rather than actually weighing what I had to say.

But you can take these guidelines in the opposite way - making sure
that you yourself don't inadvertantly phrase things in a way that can
seem like an encoded attack. Obviously in a healthy dialog, you
shouldn't launch actual verbal attacks or belittle someone. However,
even on top of that, you should avoid assertions that contain
assumptions others may legitimately not agree with. There is a big
difference between "How can we do better?" and "How can we avoid doing
so poorly next time?". While the intent of the two questions are
identical, the latter contains a performance assesment others may not
agree with. And the response to the question is likely to prompt a
flurry of verbal self defense, rather than get an answer to the
question.

You want any dialog to focus on the topic, rather than backward
looking evaluations, self-defense and guarding of egos. The best way
to do that is to ensure your statements don't embed assumptions that
prompt side-discussions.

** WATCH OUT FOR "YOUR" AGENDA. IT MAY NOT BE THE APPROPRIATE FORUM **

A dialog is an attempt at joint problem seeking. A good dialog may or
may not have a set agenda; if it does, the agenda should serve to
focus discussion. The outcome should be a solution everyone has
contributed to. If it's a true dialog, then you should be happy to come out
of a meeting with a solution no one could have come up with on their own.

Of course, not every meeting is a dialog. We've all been to meetings
that were called because someone wanted to "sell" us something. This
is particularly the case at work, where a meeting is held so that
someone can get buy-in for something they are going to do anyway. Such
meetings may become unpleasant if the person holding the meeting was
unprepared for genuine disagreement, especially if he or she came in
with a "plan B" that also turned out to be unworkable.

The warning here is that standard management techniques do not teach
you to hold dialogs! Management techniques tell you to "pre-wire" the
meeting by getting opinions of all stakeholders before the meeting. In
such cases, the meeting-holder will have the meeting once he has
verified there is no actual disagremeents. In other words, management
techniques teach you control meetings. That is fine, but know that what
you are doing is a meeting to ratify a *fait accompli*, not a dialog.

In other words, if you know what you want from a dilaog, you don't
want a dialog. If the meeting is intended for a real dialog, then your
agenda is about the group's issues, not your issue. The assumption is
the solution is to be found by consulting everyone. Don't bring your
"Plan A" to an open dialog and think you're going to sell it and go
away the hero.

** COMMUNICATION IS ABOUT WHAT THE LISTENER DOES **

It is not enough to say something. It is necessary that others listen
to you and understand what you are saying.

This means a number of things. The first is that in a dialog, you have
to think of others - the people you are communicating with - before
you begin to speak. It is not about making your mouth-hole happy with
whatever wants to come out of it.

A dialog is not a place to come to unburden your pain or dirty laundry
or air your hidden wounds. The surest way to get people to stop
listening to you is to act like you are a problem that needs to be
solved. This does not mean that you cannot talk about problems that
need to be addressed.  It simply means you have to remember that you
are trying to drive change or action, you must first get people to
listen. And the message you convey must reflect what you want the to
listen to. If the content of your message is primarily emotional,
people are going to react to your emotions, no matter what words you
use. And likewise, a logical argument cannot be delivered like a pep
talk from a personal coach.

This also means thinking of your audience before opening your mouth.
Your goal in communication is not to be challenging. Your goal is to
get your message across. The Baha'i Writings refer to this as using
"words as mild as milk": easy to digest. If you come into an open
dialog with people from everywhere and unload with jargon and
technical words or address everyone using terms from postmodern
literary theory, don't be surprised if you draw a bunch of blank
stares. If you address them the way a disappointed preacher might
address congregants who have done something they are ashamed of, don't
be surprised if someone immediately changes the subject or the
conversation goes somewhere you didn't intend.

** STATE OPINIONS AS OPINIONS AND FACTS AS FACTS **

Everyone comes into the dialog not just with a different viewpoint,
but with a different background and different set of facts. It is easy
to forget that others know things you don't and you have tacit
knowledge that others don't.

In such a situation, it is important that you label what you know is
an opinion as such, and what you know as a fact as such. Commonsense
background information may be unknown by and useful to other people in
the dialog, and they need to not only know your information, but the
level of confidence one should have in this information. This is one
reason.

The other reason is that there is much you think you know that you
don't know. In many cases, identify something you know to be a fact to
the best of your knowledge gives others an opening to correct
you. This is GOOD. You and everyone else needs to find out what common
knowledge is wrong.

** IF YOU'RE "THE LEADER," TRY TO TALK LESS THAN EVERYONE ELSE **

We are a society which places a great deal of importance on
leadership. This is a side-effect of being an individualistic
country. Not only is the the most important part of a society are the
individual elements, not the environment, but it is generally felt
that some individuals contribute more and are far more responsible for
success. As such, leaders are looked to to drive discussion. This
means if you are a leader, you aren't just "one of the guys" in any
discussion, and there is no way to become one. Your best bet is to
keep your mouth shut and listen. Your words have a lot of
weight and will be freighted with a lot of assumptions. People
may assume you are stating policies. People may assume you are
speaking on behalf of more powerful people that aren't there. People
may assume you are setting direction. So "spitballing" isn't an option.

Additionally, there are about thirty percent of all people in any
given group which are "authoritarian" in orientation. That is, their
first instinct is to look for a strong leader or someone in authority
who will speak for them. The minute they see one, they will nod their
head in agreement or phrase their responses to align with such. The
net effect of such people will be to give the conversation a momemtum
that will bury any dissenting voices. Unfortunately the dissenting
voices are _exactly the ones you want_.

If you sense the conversation has stalled because others are waiting
for you to chime in, that is the time when it is most important to
keep silent. The goal of the dialog is to find the truth. The more
time you use your post as a leader to probe for other viewpoints, the
more likely it is that you will get the information everyone needs
from the discussion.

** DON'T FEEL COMPELLED TO FIX EVERY LITTLE FALSEHOOD **

It's pretty common in open dialogues to hear something that doesn't
sound right to you, and sometimes you just have to let such things
go. It's much less that often-repeated untruths have a bearing on the
topic being conversed. In such a case, it is easy to get bogged down
with corrections, causing the dialog to get sidetracked.

The solution, then, is correct only the information that has bearing
on the topic at hand.  Tempting as it is to give a verbal beatdown to
the anti-vaxxer who just injected their pet cause into a neighborhood
planning meeting, it's your job as a participant to focus conversation
on the topic. Otherwise, you'll be like that character in XKCD who
won't go to bed because (**gasp**) (someone is *wrong* on the
internet)[https://www.xkcd.com/386/].

We are told in the Baha'i writings to be forbearing with everyone,
even those who spout the most ridiculous drivel. Even if you suspect
someone is outright burying everyone with lies, you cannot win a
frontal war against the ["Gish
Gallop."](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gish_gallop) Instead, focus as
much on the issue at hand; correct if you must, but focus on bringing
out the truth. If the falsehood cannot stand on its own, it won't need
you to knock it over.

** OPEN COMMUNITIES: KEEP GAP BETWEEN INSIDERS AND OUTSIDERS
   REASONABLE **

This has a little to do with the "politics" of your group, but it is
also important for productive ongoing dialogs.

One tricky part of dialogues is dealing with outsiders. By outsiders,
I mean those who are not ordinarily in the group. Whether invited in
specifically or coming in in response to a public invitation, they are
usually the only good way to get an outside perspective. As such, it
is necessary to treat such people with respect. You will do well to
minimize the emotional "distance" between the regulars and the
outsiders in dialogs.

Unfortunately, outsiders are taxing. Some of this is due to the nature
of group conversation - outsiders are unknown, and harder to
communicate with. You cannot rely on an existing relationship to
smoothe over feelings in the case of a misstatement. Outsiders may
rudely hijack the dialog for their own personal agenda. And outsiders
may not even be familiar with the concept of a dialog, and instead
take to arguing.

The temptation is to shut off every meeting. Usually there is a better
compromised to be achieved, perhaps by having a limited number of
closed meetings, while making it obvious and transparent how one becomes a
member who participates in this closed meeting. Large volunteer
organizations frequently have closed "executive meetings" where just
the leaders meet for just these reasons; even in these cases, if
someone is really motivated and wants to help, I've frequently seen
the executive team invent a role ("that's Assistant TO the Regional
Manager") just to allow those people to join regularly.

Outsiders represent an opportunity to get outside blood in your
dialog. Not all will want to contribute positively, but some
will. After the first contact, make it obvious how they can contribute
more if they wish.

** REFER TO MANDATE TO AVOID BIKESHEDDING **


** VOTING IS NOT CONSENSUS **

You've done it in your pick-up ball team. You've done it in
meetings. You did it in the classroom growing up. You've seen it in
movies. A big decision is made by a group and everyone resolves
disagreements The American Way. They vote.

Don't do it. Or at least, treat it as a starting point, not an endpoint.

Remember, your goal in a dialog is to come to a solution for the group
as a whole. You want everyone consulted and everyone to assent to the
solution. If that is the case, why vote? What is the point of doing
it? Ideally, every decision should be by acclimation.

It is all too easy in a dialog to use a vote as a means to shut down
debate at a point where the resolution is favorable to the majority,
with the goal of making anyone who still dissents look like a "sore
loser." There is just a polite way of shouting down the minority.


** DON'T REACT TO EVERY PROVOCATION. DO DEFEND YOURSELVES AGAINST WOLVES **




** NICENESS IS NOT OPTIONAL, IT IS A MANDATE **

