---
title: On Virtue
---

Elsewhere I have written about the fact that unlike a lot of people
writing about ethics, I am more of a "virtues" ethicist. The reason I
believe this is primarily because I think when it comes down to most
ethical decisions, people don't think - they _act_, then think. As a
result, ethical behavior is more of a habit. Someone can train
themselves to behave properly and ethically to make such things a
habit. Of course, there are the "big issues" that one must take a
stand on, but even here, good habits make it all the more easier to
choose the right thing. One can hardly make important-looking, visible
sacrifices for one's fellow man without already having good habits of
discipline and self-denial.

There is also the fact that moral development has been studied, as
opposed to character development. Indeed, certain forms of moral
thought are more mature than others. But even here, there is a
difference between moral thought and moral action. Lawrence Kohlberg
and his ilk would hardly have dedicated their lives to the study of
moral development if they did not think that moral thoughts led to
moral action. But moral action can require sacrifices, which again,
are a heck of a lot easier if someone has good character.

Moral thought is actually the easy part of it. If one is the sort of
person who reads about moral development, it is particularly easy,
since you probably have a level of education that makes it possible to
understand moral thought. Indeed, the bridge from "conventional"
morality to "postconventional" morality identified by Kohlberg seems
to be nothing more than a more sophisticated way about thinking of
moral norms. It is true that many have moral beliefs that are nothing
more sophisticated than "gut feel," leading them to prejudice, but
these are hardly the sort who study moral thought and philosophy.

This is a little problematic for development. If moral thought
automatically led to moral action, the problem would simply be one of
education - teach people why certain things "feel wrong," teach them
to identify core principles about why that is and how norms form,
teach them why all societies use fixed norms to guide behavior, that
these norms must change over time in response to changing conditions,
but that all related to certain universal moral truths. Make someone
understand that sentence fully, and as far as Kohlberg's framework,
they're morally complete!

Of course, it isn't that simple. In which case, virtue and character
eductation must be regarded as every bit as important.

This has proven a bit more difficult.

-------------------------------------

Go through any bookstore and you'll see tons of writings about
character development and cultivation of virtues. Tellingly, almost
all of said books are about children's education. Partly, this is a
response to market demand. All parents, it seems, want to do a good
job raising good kids; either because they care for their kids, or at
worst, because they care what others think of their kids and want to
make sure they do not reflect badly on their parents. So there are
loads of books on these.

My survey of these books has been limited to that of an interested
parent. The techniques seem many and varied, and one suspects most of
the recommended techniques would badly fail any rigorous scientific
study. Unfortunately, many books preportedly about character
development are, in truth, are simply books seeking to assist parents
with indoctrinating children into their parents' mindset. One imagines
that many of the parents who buy such books would never buy a
character development book for themselves, given that regard their
characters as perfected already!  This may explain why methods for
character development are so frequently at odds with one another. I've
seen some books that recommend beating children (I wish I were joking)
while others regard even the slightest physical discipline as
unethical in themselves. Some insist that raising children under a
particular religious denomination is necessary; others insist that
doing so in itself is harmful.

However, one thing they agree on, as do I, is the fact that it is
_easier_ to teach children virtues, character and moral behavior than
it is adults. Ones moral behavior is easily shaped over the first 15
years of development, and continues more slowly for the next 10 or
even 15 years. However, everyone realizes that things are much harder
for adults to change, and serious directional change is usually the
sorts of years-long efforts sometimes involving professional help.
This does not mean that adults do not need character
development.

The fact that you will find nothing intended directly at virtue and
character cultivation in adults would seem a serious oversight.  This
is ironic, given that there is a whole section in any bookstore
labeled "self help," many of the problems they wish to assist are
indirectly related to character development - or at least would be
greatly assisted by such development. But generally one sees nothing
explicitly for continuing one's quest to be a better person _as such_.
A more popular observation was noted in Steven Covey's self-improvement
juggernaught "Seven Habits of Highly Effective People," where he noted
that self-improvement literature in America had once focused on the
cultivation of virtue and character, but over time has abandoned this
orientation.

There are probably good reasons for this. One could be lack of
explicit interest. Once one reaches adulthood, focusing on
self-improvement requires an assessment of opportunity cost.  Read a
book on character improvement, or read a book aimed at improving one's
romantic life?  Unless one is perfectly happy with one's situation,
the practical concerns are always going to crowd out something that
will take years to pay off in subtle ways over decades. I too have
made this tradeoff. In spite of 30 years as a grown adult, I never
made a focused effort to improve my character. Why is that? I have
multiple graduate degrees, all of which were won through years of
studying (indeed, very few people would be as embarassed as I by being
asked "If you're so smart, why aren't you rich?"). I've gone to the
gymn regularly for most of the past 30 years, and I generally spend at least a
few hours each week on what I'd consider "professional development."


Yet, I spend no time specifically on character development. Why is
that? I confess it really isn't about opportunity costs.

The reason is there is the techniques are poorly outlined. There is no
_method_ associated with character development. Once one starts on a
course of improvement, there is no guarantee of a payoff.
There are some techniques, but there's no rigor behind
them, and certainly no systemic pedagogy. If you use the technique for
an hour every day for a few years, there's no guarantee you will come
out a better person.

The irony is that for much of our history, there was something focused
on development of character and virtue. Much of it was taken by
religion. In classical secular societies (think classical Greece and
Rome, or much of Imperial China), a host of philosophers filled very
much the same need, assisting the cultivation of virtue. To some
extent, this was done by those in power of civilization; running an
efficient empire requires virtue among its citizenry even if abandoned
by its leader. Such traditions have left a wealth of guidance on this
issue for posterity, both in holy text and classical literature too
numerous to list.

Surprisingly, if one goes to a church service today, there is not
nearly so much focus on this. While not entirely abandoned, an emphasis on
salvation and narrow tribal concerns of the demonination has edged out
much talk of virtue. This is depressing, though perhaps
not surprising surprising. Partly this has
been because of the wrongheaded outlook of many religious leaders, who
view their job as protecting the interests of their congregation
rather than facilitating their development. Many regards 
their jobs not as leaders of congregation, but
as _growers_ of congregation. As a result, anything morally
challenging is going to get short shrift. This author remembers
childhoodl lecturings at Catholic churches. Parishoners were fine with
fire and brimstone, so long as someone _else_ was going to burn in
hellfire; but they were much less comfortable with talk of social
justice, greed and materialism. Indeed, when my friends parents
abandoned such churches for more fundamentalist denominations that
practiced "real religion," it seemed to be because their new "real
religion" spent far more effort blaming immorality on those outside of their
church walls than they did on examining it within the church.


In the case of secular literature, this tendency is easily
explained. Mass market book sales are generally driven based on easy
pitches which avoid discussions requiring exhaustive cultivation of
virtue - indeed, I suspect Steven Covey's book sold well partly
because it was a schema that found itself easy to translate to
organizers. This means the pop psychology books are not likely to
delve into this area to deeply. At the more acadmic end, virtue has
become the province of clinical psychologyical analysis - even in
philosophy, there is little talk of virtue, the concept itself having
been abandoned as too value-laden to be useful.


Fun as it is to blame everyone else for this situation, there is a
legitimate reason for avoiding discussion of character cultivation: IT
IS HARD. There is no good curriculum for it. Moral _thought_ is easy
to teach - mostly just consisting of argumentation and education for
fair-minded, thoughtful people Whether elevating moral thought leads
to improved spiritual or civic virtues. As far as actual development
of actions, much of the
advice given boils down to the following:

"Try to be a better person."

"Try" is probably the most useless advice you can give someone. The
whole embedded assumption is that it is easy, you just have to
_try_. Think about when you learned a difficult math concept. Was it
solved when someone told you to "try to think harder"? When you had to
learn study habits, was it a matter of just "trying harder?" When you
are trying to put on ten pounds of muscle mass in the gym, is this
just a matter of "trying harder," without becoming familiar with
weightlifting, form, diet or proper techniques? Yet with character
education, we get this empty advice all the time.

If we are serious about character and virtue cultivation, it is not
sufficient to describe an end goal. People need a method - something
they can stick to. The method itself has to become a habit. Just as
someone who wants to be better at violin sets aside some time every
day and practices certain lessons and has a certain plan for getting
better, we need to do something similar. This has been entirely
missing in virtues cultivation. Given that people thing of
self-discipline itself as a character virtue, it is indeed odd that
there is no practice that seeks to harness this self-discipline.

And it is very likely that improving virtues and character consists of
cultivating _habits_. Much as one might try to concentrate on those
moments of "moral choice" where one's character is tested, most moral
choices are made automatically, out of habit. By ignoring such
choices, one is overlooking the point where improvement can take
place.

--------------------------

Given the "market incentives" of the established religions of the
West, and the difficulty in improving character measurably with any
success, it is no surprise in hindsight that there is far less
explicit focus on virtues or "spiritual growth" than one would expect.
This being a marketplace, anyone who would identify such a
mechanism would do well.

So it is particularly notable that the only
religions to focus on some sort of method for cultivating virtue is
also one of the numerically smallest that has no clergy. I'm talking
about: (surprise!) Buddhism.

Buddhism is one of the three great "cosmopolitan" religions of the
post-axial era. Its reach through southeast asia, India, China and
Japan has been enormous, at times competing in size and influence with
its brethren of Islam and Christianity. Like its companion religions,
it is broken into denominations, each with its own clergy and
hierarchy. And as events in Myanmarr have shown, Buddhist clergy has
not been above power politics to disastrous effects,
spending more time on the preservation of power and priveledges for
its own believers than on the cultivation of virtue.

Here in the West, however, Buddhism is primarily known for its work by
popularizers like Alan Watts and secular evangelists like Robert
Gere. Rather than focus on doctrine, the Buddhism of the West has
focused on meditation and mindfulness as specific techniques. As a
result, meditation and mindfulness has spread. The beneficiary by
association has been Buddhism. This is particularly the case among
affluent seculars, who are now far more familiar with the tenents
of meditation and benefits of practicing non-attachment than they are
with the tenets and history of Buddhism itself. This has made Buddhism
far more approachable, and indeed fashionable, among a certain class
of people.

What this shows is that there is a hunger for mechanism to allow for
self-improvement of virtue.

Additionally, science has not been still. At the time of Shoghi
Effendi's death in 1957, the march of science was well underway. Among
most people, there is still the belief that the secular sciences has
not discovered anything of value in such "spiritual" realms as the
human psyche, and that the "soft sciences" has not delivered anything
of benefit. This is far from the truth. The tendency of social
sciences to deliver their conclusions in arid, value-free conclusions
has obscured the fact that we now know more than ever what the
mechanisms are for becoming a better person.

We know, for instance:
* That most actions by humans, rather than being deliberate, are
result of habit and reactions from one's "emotional" brain, and
reasons for actions are generated after-the-fact;
* That human beings are wired to act upon emotion rather than
intelligence, and that there are techniques to overcome this reflex;
* That humans develop morally in certain stages, and that there are
techniques to ensure children and adolescents do not get stuck along
the way;
* That certain virtues are associated with primitive societies, but
modern societies required the creation of new virtues, requiring their
own techniques of development;
* That certain virtues, far from being matters of "good and bad," are
simply social skills that can be learned just as anything else.
* That there are evil people in this world, but to operate freely,
they also need a critical mass of less morally developed people
through whom they can work;
* That there are certain known elements of personality that can be
identified (the big five); that tendencies in this area leads to
cultivation of certain virtues over others, and that this is not a
fixed element over one's live but can change, albeit very slowly.

Such knowledge should not be ignored when it comes to moral
self-development. Should one object that this information must be
illegitimate because it doesn't come from their preferred source of
religious inspiration, one is free to disregard it. As for me, I
prefer the outlook of the Baha'i Faith, which states the necessesity
of using the tools of science whenever it can assist.

As far as a "pedagogy" (method of instruction) for development of
virtues and character, there have been a numerous array of social
organizations aimed at teaching children good character and virtuous
behavior. Few people, aside from those with partisan political agenda,
would dispute the positive influences of organizations such as Boys
Club, Big Brother/Sister, Boy Scouts/Girl Scouts, and the like, all of
which seek to improve one's character by placing them in situations
where adults are required to model good behavior and children are
encouraged by necessity to exhibit more "adult" virtues of
self-reliance, self discipline and honesty. Additionally, religions generally
have as one focus of their Sunday schools the cultivation of moral
behavior. This is true even for those denominations that have
abandoned their role as moral guardians in favor of their role as
defenders of their member's tribal culture. While some religious
education may injure children though
cultivation of prejudice and fanaticism, at least some  religious instruction
focuses explicitly on ensuring that children know the basics of moral
behavior. Churches do not wish for the children of their members to
grow up and perform acts that wil do scandal to their own churches.

A good example of a character-building pedagogy with its roots in both
spiritual and secular traditions is The Virtues Project. Unlike the above
activities, The Virtues Project provides an explicit method of instruction for
virtues and character development. The method itself focuses on
modeling virtues and ensuring children recognize them in themselves
and in the acts of others. Perhaps its greatest contribution is the
actual _enumeration_ of virtues. Children are not capable of abstract
thought; it is not possible to teach "good" and "bad,"
but it is possible to teach them "dishonest" and "honest,"
"trustworty" and "untrustworth." By pulling virtues out of abstract,
airy notions and into more concrete qualities, they have
done an immeasurable good.

The creators of The Virtues Project have acknowledged there is no one
universal set of virtues, but sought to identify those elevated in all
major religions as a basis of their virtues. For reference, here are
the 52 virtues:

  assertiveness
  caring
  cleanliness
  compassion
  confidence
  consideration 
  courage
  courtesy
  creativity
  detachment
  determination
  enthusiasm
  excellence
  faithfulness
  flexibility
  forgiveness
  friendliness
  generosity
  gentleness
  helpfulness
  honesty
  honor
  humility
  idealism
  joyfulness
  justice
  kindness
  love
  loyalty
  mercy
  moderation
  modesty
  obedience
  orderliness
  patience
  peacefulness
  prayerfulness
  purposefulness
  reliability
  respect
  responsibility
  reverence
  self-discipline
  service
  steadfastness
  tact
  thankfulness
  tolerance
  trust
  trustworthiness
  truthfulness
  unity

Obviously, their enumeration was driven on some need to come up with
with a round number of 52 (one for every day of the week), and there
is some duplication - try explaining the difference between honesty
and truthfulness to yourself, let alone your children in Sunday
school! But it presents a foundational contribution to any serious
effort to improve one's character.

However, all of the above focus on cultivation of virtues and
character in children. We have little for the ongoing character
improvement of adults. Most of the religious denominations have fallen
down on the job in their responsibility to cultivate the characters of
their own members. And other than that, we have little. Self-help
books tend to shy away from talk of value-laden virtues. Occasionally,
you see secular movements which aim to spell out and cultivate secular
and civic virtues. In the past, these movements have been significant;
e.g. Society for Ethical Culture. But in the West in general, lower
levels of civic engagement have been accompanied by flagging interest
in such groups. In secular circles, an emphasis on the "practical"
aspects of Buddhism and a small resurgent interest in Stoic
philosophers seems nothing more than an epiphenomonon.

==============================

While The Virtues Project has their roots in analysis of spiritual
traditions, there have been other studies. A particular impressive
one, _Character Strengths and Virtues: A Handbook and Classification_,
by Christopher Peterson and Martin E. P. Seligman (Oxford Press 2004),
uses a more rigorous scientific approach toward their enumeration of
"Character Strengths." Their own list is as follows:

  WISDOM
    Creativity
    Curiosity
    Open-Mindedness
    Love of Learning
    Perspective (Wisdom)
  COURAGE
    Bravery
    Persistence
    Integrity
    Vitality
  HUMANITY
    Love
    Kindness
    "Social Intelligence"
  JUSTICE
    Citizenship (Teamwork, Loyalty)
    Fairness
    Leadership
  TEMPERANCE
    Forgiveness/Mercy
    Humility/Modesty
    Prudence
    Self-Control
  TRANSCENDENCE
    Appreciation of Beuty and Excellence (Awe, Wonder)
    Gratitude
    Hope (Optimism)
    Humor (Playfulness)
    "Spirituality" (Religiousness, Purpose)

While the above lists are different in length, there is a considerable
amount of overlap - enough so that the one could easily use this book
as an in-depth reference to The Virtues Project curriculum. Using the
above broad categories, one could make a stab at organizing the 52
virtues along the above lines:

  WISDOM
    Creativity			  creativity
    Curiosity
    Open-Mindedness		  flexibility
    Love of Learning
    Perspective (Wisdom)	  detachment

  COURAGE
    Bravery		courage
    Persistence		  determination
    Integrity		  honesty, truthfulness,   trustworthiness,
                          responsibility, reliability
    Vitality		  enthusiasm

  HUMANITY
    Love		  love, compassion,   gentleness
    Kindness		    kindness,   caring,   generosity
    "Social Intelligence"    assertiveness,  friendliness,
                           tact,   consideration,   courtesy

  JUSTICE
    Citizenship (Teamwork, Loyalty)     helpfulness,
    			     loyalty,   tolerance
    Fairness		     justice,   unity
    Leadership

  TEMPERANCE
    Forgiveness/Mercy	  forgiveness,   mercy
    Humility/Modesty	    humility,  modesty
    Prudence		      moderation
    Self-Control	      self-discipline

  TRANSCENDENCE
    Appreciation of Beuty and Excellence (Awe, Wonder)   reverence,
                               prayerfulness
    Gratitude  	    	  thankfulness
    Hope (Optimism)	      confidence,   steadfastness, idealism
    Humor (Playfulness)	        joyfulness
    "Spirituality" (Religiousness, Purpose   purposefulness, faithfulness


The misalignments are usually one of focus. The Virtues Project is
aimed explicitly at children. That may explain why the following are
are identified only in The Virtues Project:

  cleanliness
  excellence (doing one's best; not the same as appreciation of excellence)
  orderliness
  obedience
  peacefulness

The fact these are regarded as "common sense" do not make them
unnecessary virtues; if you disagree, try living without them for a
few days and see how much your influence upon others plummets.

But a few are more notable. The following others are also in the
Virtues Project only:

  honor
  patience
  respect
  service
  trust

Additionally, "unity" was placed under fairness, but is generally a
superset of that.

Much of this looks unusual, until one looks at the concept of
"Leadership," for which there is no equivalent. Leadership one of the
more fuzzy, abstract concepts, I maintain the group above is a set of
virtues which, as a collective, defines the virtues of a "servant
leader." While I haven't done any exhaustive research on this topic,
my experience as a first-line manager make this all the more
evident.

If I would group it, my grouping would be similar, but based on these:

"JUVENILE"
WISDOM
COURAGE
HUMANITY
LEADERSHIP
JUSTICE
TEMPERANCE
TRANSCENDENCE

Juvenile virtues are thoe that are most important for children but
that are taken as a given later in life - cleanliness, orderliness,
truthfulness (e.g. not lying), peacefulness and obedience. Leadership
is broken out from Humanity as being a distinct set of virtues
necessary for using one's own virtues for to positively influence the
group.

There are a few unusal, unfortunate omissions in The Virtues Project,
as relating to the wisdom virtues:

  Curiosity
  Critical thought (an aspet of open-mindedness)
  Love of learning

In general, I am happier with the enumeration in The Virtues Project,
if only because the qualities identified are more concrete. While this
is partly of necessity (we are using this for children, after all),
something more concrete is more actionable. This makes them more
suitable for a self-improvement effort. However, I do think some of
the omissions identified should be brought in. Given that all of these
are emphased in Baha'i Writings, they are worth bringing in.

