On Philosophy:

All mankind must be given a knowledge of science and philosophy --
that is, as much as may be deemed necessary. All cannot be scientists
and philosophers, but each should be educated according to his needs
and deserts.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, The Promulgation of Universal Peace, p. 106)

What philosophy has ever elevated a whole nation and influenced
humanity? Philosophy  90  of necessity is restricted to a small school
and cannot have an essentially moral influence.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, Divine Philosophy, p. 89)

Humanity is divided into two classes: -- one is satisfied with the
knowledge of divinity through its attributes and the other strives to
understand the mysteries of divinity and be informed of the
fundamental principles of divine philosophy.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, Divine Philosophy, p. 103)

Knowing God, therefore, means the comprehension and the knowledge of
His attributes, and not of His Reality. This knowledge of the
attributes is also proportioned to the capacity and power of man; it
is not absolute. Philosophy consists in comprehending the reality of
things as they exist, according to the capacity and the power of
man. For the phenomenal reality can comprehend the Preexistent
attributes only to the extent of the human capacity. The mystery of
Divinity is sanctified and purified from the comprehension of the
beings, for all that comes to the imagination is that which man
understands, and the power of the understanding of man does not
embrace the Reality of the Divine Essence. All that man is able to
understand are the attributes of Divinity, the radiance of which
appears and is visible in the world and within men's souls.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, Some Answered Questions, p. 221)

As material and physical sciences are taught here and are constantly
unfolding in wider vistas of attainment, I am hopeful that spiritual
development may also follow and keep pace with these outer
advantages. As material knowledge is illuminating those within the
walls of this great temple of learning, so also may the light of the
spirit, the inner and divine light of the real philosophy glorify this
institution. The most important principle of divine philosophy is the
oneness of the world of humanity, the unity of mankind, the bond
conjoining east and west, the tie of love which blends human hearts.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, Baha'i World Faith - Abdu'l-Baha Section, p. 244)

According to divine philosophy, there are two important and universal
conditions in the world of material phenomena; one which concerns
life, the other concerning death; one relative to existence, the other
non-existence; one manifest in composition, the other in
decomposition. Some define existence as the expression of reality or
being, and non-existence as non-being, imagining that death is
annihilation. This is a mistaken idea, for total annihilation is an
impossibility.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, Baha'i World Faith - Abdu'l-Baha Section, p. 263)

According to divine philosophy there are two important and universal
conditions in the world of material phenomena: one which concerns
life, the other concerning death; one relative to existence, the other
nonexistence; one manifest in composition, the other in
decomposition. Some define existence as the expression of reality or
being and nonexistence as nonbeing, imagining that death is
annihilation. This is a mistaken idea, for total annihilation is an
impossibility.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, The Promulgation of Universal Peace, p. 85)

By heavenly sciences I mean divine philosophy and spiritual teachings;
by the songs and fragrances of the rose garden I mean the mysteries of
the kingdom of kingdoms, the secrets of the degrees of existence and
the knowledge of the results of human life.  140 

This universe is not created through the fortuitous concurrences of
atoms; it is created by a great law which decrees that the tree bring
forth certain definite fruit. Verily, this universe contains many
worlds of which we know nothing.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, Divine Philosophy, p. 139)

By materialists, whose belief with regard to Divinity hath been
explained, is not meant philosophers in general, but rather that group
of materialists of narrow vision who worship that which is sensed, who
depend upon the five senses only, and whose criterion of knowledge is
limited to that which can be perceived by the senses. All that can be
sensed is to them real, whilst whatever falleth not under the power of
the senses is either unreal or doubtful. The existence of the Deity
they regard as wholly doubtful.

It is as thou hast written, not philosophers in general but
narrow-minded materialists that are meant. As to deistic philosophers,
such as Socrates, Plato and Aristotle, they are indeed worthy of
esteem and of the highest praise, for they have rendered distinguished
services to mankind. In like manner we regard the materialistic,
accomplished, moderate philosophers, who have been of service (to
mankind).  8 

We regard knowledge and wisdom as the foundation of the progress of
mankind, and extol philosophers who are endowed with broad vision.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, Tablet to August Forel, p. 7)

Material virtues have attained great development, but ideal virtues
have been left far behind. If you should ask a thousand persons, "What
are the proofs of the reality of Divinity?" perhaps not one would be
able to answer. If you should ask further, "What proofs have you
regarding the essence of God?" "How do you explain inspiration and
revelation?" "What are the evidences of conscious intelligence beyond
the material universe?" "Can you suggest a plan and method for the
betterment of human moralities?" "Can you clearly define and
differentiate the world of nature and the world of Divinity?" -- you
would receive very little real knowledge and enlightenment upon these
questions. This is due to the fact that development of the ideal
virtues has been neglected. People speak of Divinity, but the ideas
and beliefs they have of Divinity are, in reality,
superstition. Divinity is the effulgence of the Sun of Reality, the
manifestation of spiritual virtues and ideal powers. The intellectual
proofs of Divinity are based upon observation and evidence which
constitute decisive argument, logically proving the reality of
Divinity, the effulgence of mercy, the certainty of inspiration and
immortality of the spirit. This is, in reality, the science of
Divinity. Divinity is not what is set forth in dogmas and sermons of
the church. Ordinarily when the word Divinity is mentioned, it is
associated in the minds of the hearers with certain formulas and
doctrines, whereas it essentially means the wisdom and knowledge of
God, the effulgence of the Sun of Truth, the revelation of reality and
divine philosophy.

105.5 Philosophy is of two kinds: natural and divine. Natural
philosophy seeks knowledge of physical verities and explains material
phenomena, whereas divine philosophy deals with ideal verities and
phenomena of the spirit. The field and scope of natural philosophy
have been greatly enlarged, and its accomplishments are most
praiseworthy, for it has served humanity. But according to the
evidence of present world conditions divine philosophy -- which has
for its object the sublimation of human nature, spiritual advancement,
heavenly guidance for the development of the human race, attainment to
the breaths of the Holy Spirit and knowledge  327  of the verities of
God -- has been outdistanced and neglected. Now is the time for us to
make an effort and enable it to advance apace with the philosophy of
material investigation so that awakening of the ideal virtues may
progress equally with the unfoldment of the natural powers. In the
same proportion that the body of man is developing, the spirit of man
must be strengthened; and just as his outer perceptions have been
quickened, his inner intellectual powers must be sensitized so that he
need not rely wholly upon tradition and human precedent. In divine
questions we must not depend entirely upon the heritage of tradition
and former human experience; nay, rather, we must exercise reason,
analyze and logically examine the facts presented so that confidence
will be inspired and faith attained. Then and then only the reality of
things will be revealed to us. The philosophers of Greece -- such as
Aristotle, Socrates, Plato and others -- were devoted to the
investigation of both natural and spiritual phenomena. In their
schools of teaching they discoursed upon the world of nature as well
as the supernatural world. Today the philosophy and logic of Aristotle
are known throughout the world. Because they were interested in both
natural and divine philosophy, furthering the development of the
physical world of mankind as well as the intellectual, they rendered
praiseworthy service to humanity. This was the reason of the triumph
and survival of their teachings and principles. Man should continue
both these lines of research and investigation so that all the human
virtues, outer and inner, may become possible.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, The Promulgation of Universal Peace, p. 326)

As regards your own studies: he would advise you not to devote too
much of your time to the abstract side of philosophy, but rather to
approach it from a more historical angle. As to correlating philosophy
with the Bahá'í teachings; this is a tremendous work which scholars in
the future can undertake. We must remember that not only are all the
teachings not yet translated into English, but they are not even all
collected yet.

	(Shoghi Effendi, The Unfolding Destiny of the British Baha'i Community, p. 445)


Truth, and Search for Truth

Reflect that man's power of thought consists of two kinds. One kind is
true, when it agrees with a determined truth. Such conceptions find
realization in the exterior world; such are accurate opinions, correct
theories, scientific discoveries and inventions.

The other kind of conceptions is made up of vain thoughts and useless
ideas which yield neither fruit nor result, and which have no
reality. No, they surge like the waves of the sea of imaginations, and
they pass away like idle dreams.

In the same way, there are two sorts of spiritual discoveries. One is
the revelations of the Prophets, and the spiritual discoveries of the
elect. The visions of the Prophets are not dreams; no, they are
spiritual discoveries and have reality. They say, for example, "I saw
a person in a certain form, and I said such a thing, and he gave such
an answer." This vision is in the world of wakefulness, and not in
that of sleep. Nay, it is a spiritual discovery which is expressed as
if it were the appearance of a vision.  252 

The other kind of spiritual discoveries is made up of pure
imaginations, but these imaginations become embodied in such a way
that many simple-hearted people believe that they have a reality. That
which proves it clearly is that from this controlling of spirits no
result or fruit has ever been produced. No, they are but narratives
and stories.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, Some Answered Questions, p. 251)

That is to say, that as the supreme Manifestations certainly possess
essential infallibility, therefore whatever emanates from Them is
identical with the truth, and conformable to reality. They are not
under the shadow of the former laws. Whatever They say is the word of
God, and whatever They perform is an upright action.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, Some Answered Questions, p. 173)

Therefore, it cannot be said there was a time when man was not. All
that we can say is that this terrestrial globe at one time did not
exist, and at its beginning man did not appear upon it. But from the
beginning which has no beginning, to the end which has no end, a
Perfect Manifestation always exists. This Man of Whom we speak is not
every man; we mean the Perfect Man.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, Some Answered Questions, p. 196)

The dependence of the creatures upon God is a dependence of emanation
-- that is to say, creatures emanate from God; they do not manifest
Him.[1] The relation is that of emanation and not that of
manifestation. The light of the sun emanates from the sun; it does not
manifest it. The appearance through emanation is like the appearance
of the rays from the luminary of the horizons of the world -- that is
to say, the holy essence of the Sun of Truth is not divided and does
not descend to the condition of the creatures.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, Some Answered Questions, p. 202)

Therefore, all creatures emanate from God -- that is to say, it is by
God that all things are realized, and by Him that all beings have
attained to existence. The first thing which emanated from God is that
universal reality, which the ancient philosophers termed the "First
Mind," and which the people of Baha call the "First Will." This
emanation, in that which concerns its action in the world of God, is
not limited by time or place; it is without beginning or end --
beginning and end in relation to God are one. The preexistence of God
is the preexistence of essence, and also preexistence of time, and the
phenomenality of contingency is essential and not temporal, as we have
already explained one day at table.[1] [1 Cf. "Real Preexistence,"
p. 280.]

Though the "First Mind" is without beginning, it does not become a
sharer in the preexistence of God, for the existence of the universal
reality in relation to the existence of God is nothingness, and it has
not the power to become an associate of God and like unto Him in
preexistence. This subject has been before explained.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, Some Answered Questions, p. 202)

The logical proof of the immortality of the spirit is this, that no
sign can come from a nonexisting thing -- that is to say, it is
impossible that from absolute nonexistence signs should appear -- for
the signs are the consequence of an existence, and the consequence
depends upon the existence of the principle. So from a nonexisting sun
no light can radiate; from a nonexisting sea no waves appear; from a
nonexisting cloud no rain falls; a nonexisting tree yields no fruit; a
nonexisting man neither manifests nor produces anything. Therefore, as
long as signs of existence appear, they are a proof that the possessor
of the sign is existent.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, Some Answered Questions, p. 225)

But the initiated savants of the Theosophists and Sufis, who have
studied this question, think there are two categories of
existence. One is general existence, which is understood by the human
intelligence; this is a phenomenon, an accident among accidents, and
the reality of the things is the essence. But pantheism does not apply
to this general and imaginary existence, but only to the Veritable
Existence, freed and sanctified from all other interpretation; through
It all things exist, and It is the Unity through which all things have
come into the world, such as matter, energy and this general existence
which is comprehended by the human mind. Such is the truth of this
question according to the Theosophists and the Sufis.

Briefly, with regard to this theory that all things exist by the
Unity, all are agreed -- that is to say, the philosophers and the
Prophets. But there is a difference between them. The Prophets say,
The Knowledge of God has no need of the existence of beings, but the
knowledge of the creature needs the existence of things known; if the
Knowledge of God had need of any other thing, then it would be the
knowledge of the creature, and not that of God. For the Preexistent is
different from the phenomenal, and the phenomenal is opposed to the
Preexistent; that which we attribute to the creature -- that is, the
necessities of the contingent beings -- we deny for God; for
purification, or sanctification from imperfections, is one of His
necessary properties. So in the phenomenal we see ignorance; in the
Preexistent we recognize knowledge. In the phenomenal we see weakness;
in the Preexistent we recognize power. In the phenomenal we see
poverty; in the Preexistent we recognize wealth. So the phenomenal is
 294  the source of imperfections, and the Preexistent is the sum of
perfections. The phenomenal knowledge has need of things known; the
Preexistent Knowledge is independent of their existence. So the
preexistence of the specification and of the individualization of
beings which are the things known of God the Most High does not exist;
and these divine and perfect attributes are not so understood by the
intelligence that we can decide if the Divine Knowledge has need of
things known or not.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, Some Answered Questions, p. 293)

Now concerning the Essence of Divinity: in truth it is on no account
determined by anything apart from its own nature, and can in no wise
be comprehended. For whatsoever can be conceived by man is a reality
that hath limitations and is not unlimited; it is circumscribed, not
all-embracing. It can be comprehended by man, and is controlled by
him. Similarly it is certain that all human conceptions are
contingent, not absolute; that they have a mental existence, not a
material one. Moreover, differentiation of stages in the contingent
world is an obstacle to understanding. How then can the contingent
conceive the Reality of the absolute? As previously mentioned,
differentiation of stages in the contingent plane is an obstacle to
understanding. Minerals, plants and animals are bereft of the mental
faculties of man that discover the realities of all things, but man
himself comprehendeth all the stages beneath him. Every superior stage
comprehendeth that which is inferior and discovereth the reality
thereof, but the inferior one is unaware of that which is superior and
cannot comprehend it. Thus man cannot grasp the Essence of Divinity,
but can, by his reasoning power, by observation, by his intuitive
faculties and the revealing power of his faith, believe in God,
discover the bounties of His Grace.

	(Abdu'l-Baha, Tablet to August Forel, p. 14)

Man has the perceptive faculty; nature cannot perceive. It is
therefore proved and evident that man is nobler than nature.

7.3 If we accept the supposition that man is but a part of nature, we
are confronted by an illogical statement, for this is equivalent to
claiming that a part may be endowed with qualities which are absent in
the whole. For man who is a part of nature has perception,
intelligence, memory, conscious reflection and susceptibility, while
nature itself is quite bereft of them. How is it possible for the part
to be possessed of qualities or faculties which are absent in the
whole? The truth is that God has given to man certain powers which are
supernatural. How then can man be considered a captive of nature?

	(Abdu'l-Baha, The Promulgation of Universal Peace, p. 17)

In this Day the secrets of the earth are laid bare before the eyes of
men. The pages of swiftly-appearing newspapers are indeed the mirror
of the world. They reflect the deeds and the pursuits of divers
peoples and kindreds. They both reflect them and make them known. They
are a mirror endowed with hearing, sight and speech. This is an
amazing and potent phenomenon. However, it behoveth the  40  writers
thereof to be purged from the promptings of evil passions and desires
and to be attired with the raiment of justice and equity. They should
enquire into situations as much as possible and ascertain the facts,
then set them down in writing.

Concerning this Wronged One, most of the things reported in the
newspapers are devoid of truth. Fair speech and truthfulness, by
reason of their lofty rank and position, are regarded as a sun shining
above the horizon of knowledge. The waves rising from this Ocean are
apparent before the eyes of the peoples of the world and the effusions
of the Pen of wisdom and utterance are manifest everywhere.

	(Baha'u'llah, Tablets of Baha'u'llah, p. 39)


Materialism, substance, etc.


