---
title: Quote reference
category: projects
---

ASSOCIATION WITH THOSE OF GOOD CHARACTER

When in company with the
infidels, thou art an infidel and with the pious, thou art pious. (TB TA)

... Give ear to the sayings of the Friend and
turn towards His paradise. Worldly friends, seeking their own good, appear
to love one the other, whereas the true Friend hath loved and doth love
you for your own sakes; indeed He hath suffered for your guidance
countless afflictions. Be not disloyal to such a Friend, nay rather hasten
unto Him. (HW-P 52)

O SON OF DUST! Beware! Walk not with the ungodly and seek not fellowship
with him, for such companionship turneth the radiance of the heart into
infernal fire. (HW-P 57)

O SON OF MY HANDMAID! Wouldst thou seek the grace of the Holy Spirit,
enter into fellowship with the righteous, for he hath drunk the cup of
eternal life at the hands of the immortal Cup-bearer and even as the true
morn doth quicken and illumine the hearts of the dead. (HW-P 58)

Time and again have We admonished Our beloved ones to avoid, nay to flee
from, anything whatsoever from which the odour of mischief can be
detected. The world is in great turmoil, and the minds of its people are
in a state of utter confusion. We entreat the Almighty that He may
graciously illuminate them with the glory of His Justice, and enable them
to discover that which will be profitable unto them at all times and under
all conditions. (TB LD)


CHARACTER (and Virtue)

A good character is, verily,
the best mantle for men from God. With it He adorneth the temples of His
loved ones. By My life! The light of a good character surpasseth the light
of the sun and the radiance thereof. Whoso attaineth unto it is accounted
as a jewel among men. (TB TA)

O COMPANION OF MY THRONE! Hear no evil, and see no evil, abase not
thyself, neither sigh and weep. Speak no evil, that thou mayest not hear
it spoken unto thee, and magnify not the faults of others that thine own
faults may not appear great; and wish not the abasement of anyone, that
thine own abasement be not exposed. (HW-P 44)

It behoveth the people of Bahá to render the Lord victorious through the
power of their utterance and to admonish the people by their goodly deeds
and character, inasmuch as deeds exert greater influence than words. (TB KF)

Say: Honesty, virtue, wisdom and a saintly character redound to the exaltation
of man, while dishonesty, imposture, ignorance and hypocrisy lead to his
abasement. By My life! Man’s distinction lieth not in ornaments or wealth,
but rather in virtuous behaviour and true understanding. (TB KF)

In the estimation of the
people of Bahá man’s glory lieth in his knowledge, his upright conduct,
his praiseworthy character, his wisdom, and not in his nationality or
rank. (TB KF)

Arise, O people, and, by the power of God’s might, resolve to
gain the victory over your own selves, that haply the whole earth may be
freed and sanctified from its servitude to the gods of its idle
fancies—gods that have inflicted such loss upon, and are responsible for
the misery of their wretched worshippers. These idols form the obstacle
that impedeth man in his efforts to advance in the path of perfection. (TB LD)

Let them that bear
allegiance to this Wronged One be even as a raining cloud in moments of
charity and benevolence and as a blazing fire in restraining their base
and appetitive natures. (TB LD)


CHARITY

Charity is pleasing and praiseworthy in the sight of God and is regarded
as a prince among goodly deeds. Consider ye and call to mind that which
the All-Merciful hath revealed in the Qur’án: ‘They prefer them before
themselves, though poverty be their own lot. And with such as are
preserved from their own covetousness shall it be well.’(17) Viewed in
this light, the blessed utterance above is, in truth, the day-star of
utterances. Blessed is he who preferreth his brother before himself.
Verily, such a man is reckoned, by virtue of the Will of God, the
All-Knowing, the All-Wise, with the people of Bahá who dwell in the
Crimson Ark. (TB KF)


CLEANLINESS

The choice of clothing and the cut of the beard and its dressing are left
to the discretion of men. But beware, O people, lest ye make yourselves
the playthings of the ignorant. (TB BI)


COURAGE

Valiant acts will
ensure the triumph of this Cause, and a saintly character will reinforce
its power. (TB LD)


COURTESY

O people of God! I admonish you to observe courtesy, for above all else it
is the prince of virtues. Well is it with him who is illumined with the
light of courtesy and is attired with the vesture of uprightness. Whoso is
endued with courtesy hath indeed attained a sublime station. It is hoped
that this Wronged One and everyone else may be enabled to acquire it, hold
fast unto it, observe it, and fix our gaze upon it. (TB LD)


CREATIVITY

That which traineth the world is Justice, for it is
upheld by two pillars, reward and punishment. These two pillars are the
sources of life to the world. Inasmuch as for each day there is a new
problem and for every problem an expedient solution, such affairs should
be referred to the Ministers of the House of Justice that they may act
according to the needs and requirements of the time. They that, for the
sake of God, arise to serve His Cause, are the recipients of divine
inspiration from the unseen Kingdom. (TB BI)


DETACHMENT

O SON OF MAN! If adversity befall thee not in My path, how canst thou walk
in the ways of them that are content with My pleasure? If trials afflict
thee not in thy longing to meet Me, how wilt thou attain the light in thy
love for My beauty? (HW-A 50)

O SON OF MAN! My calamity is My providence, outwardly it is fire and
vengeance, but inwardly it is light and mercy. Hasten thereunto that thou
mayest become an eternal light and an immortal spirit. This is My command
unto thee, do thou observe it. (HW-A 51)

O SON OF BEING! Busy not thyself with this world, for with fire We test
the gold, and with gold We test Our servants. (HW-A 55)

O MY SERVANT! Free thyself from the fetters of this world, and loose thy
soul from the prison of self. Seize thy chance, for it will come to thee
no more. (HW-P 40)


DISPUTATION

O SON OF DUST! Verily I say unto thee: Of all men the most negligent is he
that disputeth idly and seeketh to advance himself over his brother. Say,
O brethren! Let deeds, not words, be your adorning. (HW-P 5)


DUTY

O SON OF SPIRIT! My claim on thee is great, it cannot be forgotten. My
grace to thee is plenteous, it cannot be veiled. My love has made in thee
its home, it cannot be concealed. My light is manifest to thee, it cannot
be obscured. (HW-A 20)

O SON OF MAN! Many a day hath passed over thee whilst thou hast busied
thyself with thy fancies and idle imaginings. How long art thou to slumber
on thy bed? Lift up thy head from slumber, for the Sun hath risen to the
zenith, haply it may shine upon thee with the light of beauty. (HW-A 62)

O MY SERVANTS! Ye are the trees of My garden; ye must give forth goodly
and wondrous fruits, that ye yourselves and others may profit therefrom.
Thus it is incumbent on every one to engage in crafts and professions, for
therein lies the secret of wealth, O men of understanding! For results
depend upon means, and the grace of God shall be all-sufficient unto you.
Trees that yield no fruit have been and will ever be for the fire. (HW-P 80)

It is enjoined upon every one of you to engage in some form of occupation,
such as crafts, trades and the like. We have graciously exalted your
engagement in such work to the rank of worship unto God, the True One. (TB BI)


EDUCATION

The Pen of Glory counselleth everyone regarding the instruction and
education of children. Behold that which the Will of God hath revealed
upon Our arrival in the Prison City and recorded in the Most Holy
Book.(48) Unto every father hath been enjoined the instruction of his son
and daughter in the art of reading and writing and in all that hath been
laid down in the Holy Tablet. (TB IS)


EXCELLENCE (esp. education and arts)

It is permissible to study sciences and arts, but such sciences as are
useful and would redound to the progress and advancement of the people. (IB BI)

The first Taráz and the first effulgence which hath dawned from the
horizon of the Mother Book is that man should know his own self and
recognize that which leadeth unto loftiness or lowliness, glory or
abasement, wealth or poverty. Having attained the stage of fulfilment and
reached his maturity, man standeth in need of wealth, and such wealth as
he acquireth through crafts or professions is commendable and praiseworthy
in the estimation of men of wisdom, and especially in the eyes of servants
who dedicate themselves to the education of the world and to the
edification of its peoples. (TB TA)

In this Day the sun of craftsmanship shineth above the horizon of the
occident and the river of arts is flowing out of the sea of that region.
One must speak with fairness and appreciate such bounty. (TB TA)

Great indeed is the claim of
scientists and craftsmen on the peoples of the world. Unto this beareth
witness the Mother Book on the day of His return. (TB TJ)


FEAR OF GOD

... that which guardeth and restraineth man both outwardly and
inwardly hath been and still is the fear of God. It is man’s true
protector and his spiritual guardian. It behoveth him to cleave
tenaciously unto that which will lead to the appearance of this
supreme bounty. (TB LD)

O Jalíl! Admonish men to fear God. By God! This fear is the chief
commander of the army of thy Lord. Its hosts are a praiseworthy character
and goodly deeds. Through it have the cities of men’s hearts been opened
throughout the ages and centuries, and the standards of ascendancy and
triumph raised above all other standards. (TB IS)

In this Revelation the hosts that can render it victorious are the hosts
of praiseworthy deeds and upright character. The leader and commander of
these hosts hath ever been the fear of God, a fear that encompasseth all
things and reigneth over all things. (TB IQ)


FRIENDSHIP

O FRIEND! In the garden of thy heart plant naught but the rose of love,
and from the nightingale of affection and desire loosen not thy hold.
Treasure the companionship of the righteous and eschew all fellowship with
the ungodly. (HW-P 3)

O people! Consort with the followers of
all religions in a spirit of friendliness and fellowship. (TB BI)

They that are endued with sincerity and faithfulness should associate with
all the peoples and kindreds of the earth with joy and radiance, inasmuch
as consorting with people hath promoted and will continue to promote unity
and concord, which in turn are conducive to the maintenance of order in
the world and to the regeneration of nations. Blessed are such as hold
fast to the cord of kindliness and tender mercy and are free from
animosity and hatred. (...)

This Wronged One exhorteth the peoples of the world to observe tolerance
and righteousness, which are two lights amidst the darkness of the world
and two educators for the edification of mankind. Happy are they who have
attained thereto and woe betide the heedless. (TB TA)



GENEROSITY

O SON OF MAN! Bestow My wealth upon My poor, that in heaven thou mayest
draw from stores of unfading splendor and treasures of imperishable glory.
(HW-A 57)

O CHILDREN OF DUST! Tell the rich of the midnight sighing of the poor,
lest heedlessness lead them into the path of destruction, and deprive them
of the Tree of Wealth. To give and to be generous are attributes of Mine;
well is it with him that adorneth himself with My virtues. (HW-P 49)

O YE THAT PRIDE YOURSELVES ON MORTAL RICHES! Know ye in truth that wealth
is a mighty barrier between the seeker and his desire, the lover and his
beloved. The rich, but for a few, shall in no wise attain the court of His
presence nor enter the city of content and resignation. Well is it then
with him, who, being rich, is not hindered by his riches from the eternal
kingdom, nor deprived by them of imperishable dominion. By the Most Great
Name! The splendor of such a wealthy man shall illuminate the dwellers of
heaven even as the sun enlightens the people of the earth! (HW-P 53)

O YE RICH ONES ON EARTH! The poor in your midst are My trust; guard ye My
trust, and be not intent only on your own ease. (HW-P 54)


GRATITUDE

O SON OF BEING! With the hands of power I made thee and with the fingers
of strength I created thee; and within thee have I placed the essence of
My light. Be thou content with it and seek naught else, for My work is
perfect and My command is binding. Question it not, nor have a doubt
thereof. (HW-A 12)

O SON OF SPIRIT! Ask not of Me that which We desire not for thee, then be
content with what We have ordained for thy sake, for this is that which
profiteth thee, if therewith thou dost content thyself. (HW-A 18)


HAPPINESS

Living in seclusion or practising asceticism is not acceptable in the
presence of God. It behoveth them that are endued with insight and
understanding to observe that which will cause joy and radiance. Such
practices as are sprung from the loins of idle fancy or are begotten of
the womb of superstition ill beseem men of knowledge. In former times and
more recently some people have been taking up their abodes in the caves of
the mountains while others have repaired to graveyards at night. Say, give
ear unto the counsels of this Wronged One. Abandon the things current
amongst you and adopt that which the faithful Counsellor biddeth you.
Deprive not yourselves of the bounties which have been created for your
sake. (TB KF)


HUMILITY

O SON OF MAN! Transgress not thy limits, nor claim that which beseemeth
thee not. Prostrate thyself before the countenance of thy God, the Lord of
might and power. (HW24)

O CHILDREN OF DESIRE! Put away the garment of vainglory, and divest
yourselves of the attire of haughtiness. (HW-P 47)

O EMIGRANTS! The tongue I have designed for the mention of Me, defile it
not with detraction. If the fire of self overcome you, remember your own
faults and not the faults of My creatures, inasmuch as every one of you
knoweth his own self better than he knoweth others. (HW-P 66)

Humility exalteth man to the heaven of glory and power, whilst
pride abaseth him to the depths of wretchedness and degradation. (TB KF)


JUSTICE

The best beloved of all things in My sight is Justice;
turn not away therefrom if thou desirest Me, and neglect it not that I may
confide in thee. By its aid thou shalt see with thine own eyes and not
through the eyes of others, and shalt know of thine own knowledge and not
through the knowledge of thy neighbor. (HW-A 2)

O OPPRESSORS ON EARTH! Withdraw your hands from tyranny, for I have
pledged Myself not to forgive any man’s injustice. This is My covenant
which I have irrevocably decreed in the preserved tablet and sealed with
My seal. (HW-P 64)

O Son of Spirit! The best beloved of all things in My sight is Justice;
turn not away therefrom if thou desirest Me, and neglect it not that I may
confide in thee. By its aid thou shalt see with thine own eyes and not
through the eyes of others, and shalt know of thine own knowledge and not
through the knowledge of thy neighbour. Ponder this in thy heart; how it
behoveth thee to be. Verily justice is My gift to thee and the sign of My
loving-kindness. Set it then before thine eyes.

And if thine eyes be turned towards
justice, choose thou for thy neighbour that which thou choosest for
thyself. (TB KF)

The light of men is
Justice. Quench it not with the contrary winds of oppression and tyranny.
The purpose of justice is the appearance of unity among men. (TB KF)


KNOWLEDGE (Pursuit of)

Knowledge is one of the wondrous gifts of God. It is incumbent upon
everyone to acquire it. Such arts and material means as are now manifest
have been achieved by virtue of His knowledge and wisdom which have been
revealed in Epistles and Tablets through His Most Exalted Pen—a Pen out of
whose treasury pearls of wisdom and utterance and the arts and crafts of
the world are brought to light. (TB TA)

In truth, knowledge is a veritable treasure
for man, and a source of glory, of bounty, of joy, of exaltation, of cheer
and gladness unto him. Thus hath the Tongue of Grandeur spoken in this
Most Great Prison. (TB TJ)


LOGIC (and avoidance of Superstition)

It is men like unto Hádí Dawlat-Ábádí(6) who, with
turban and staff,(7) have been the source of opposition and hindrance and
have so grievously burdened the people with superstitions that even at the
present time they still expect the appearance of a fictitious person from
a fictitious place. Be ye warned, O men of understanding. (TB TA)

Most of the
people in Persia are steeped in deception and idle fancy. How great the
difference between the condition of these people and the station of such
valiant souls as have passed beyond the sea of names and pitched their
tents upon the shores of the ocean of detachment. Indeed none but a few of
the existing generation hath yet earned the merit of hearkening unto the
warblings of the doves of the all-highest Paradise. ‘Few of My servants
are truly thankful.’(12) People for the most part delight in
superstitions. They regard a single drop of the sea of delusion as
preferable to an ocean of certitude. By holding fast unto names they
deprive themselves of the inner reality and by clinging to vain imaginings
they are kept back from the Dayspring of heavenly signs. God grant you may
be graciously aided under all conditions to shatter the idols of
superstition and to tear away the veils of the imaginations of men. (TB KF)

We heard that which the person in question hath mentioned regarding
certain teachers of the Faith. Indeed he hath spoken truly. Some heedless
souls roam the lands in the name of God, actively engaged in ruining His
Cause, and call it promoting and teaching the Word of God; and this
notwithstanding that the qualifications of the teachers of the Faith, like
unto stars, shine resplendent throughout the heavens of the divine
Tablets. (TB KF)


LOVE

This Wronged One, rid of all attachment to the world, hath striven
with utmost endeavour to quench the fire of animosity and hatred which
burneth fiercely in the hearts of the peoples of the earth. It behoveth
every just and fair-minded person to render thanks unto God—exalted be His
glory—and to arise to promote this pre-eminent Cause, that fire may turn
into light, and hatred may give way to fellowship and love. I swear by the
righteousness of God! This is the sole purpose of this Wronged One. (TB TA)

The brightness of the fire of your love will no doubt fuse
and unify the contending peoples and kindreds of the earth, whilst the
fierceness of the flame of enmity and hatred cannot but result in strife
and ruin. (TB LD)


MAGNANIMITY

O SON OF EARTH! Know, verily, the heart wherein the least remnant of envy
yet lingers, shall never attain My everlasting dominion, nor inhale the
sweet savors of holiness breathing from My kingdom of sanctity. (HW-A 6)

O QUINTESSENCE OF PASSION! Put away all covetousness and seek contentment;
for the covetous hath ever been deprived, and the contented hath ever been
loved and praised. (HW-P 50)


MERCY

If thine eyes be
turned towards mercy, forsake the things that profit thee and cleave unto
that which will profit mankind. (TB KF)


MODERATION

In all matters moderation is
desirable. If a thing is carried to excess, it will prove a source of
evil. Consider the civilization of the West, how it hath agitated and
alarmed the peoples of the world. An infernal engine hath been devised,
and hath proved so cruel a weapon of destruction that its like none hath
ever witnessed or heard. (TB KF)


OBEDIENCE

O SON OF BEING! Walk in My statutes for love of Me and deny thyself that
which thou desirest if thou seekest My pleasure. (HW-A 38)

In every country where any of this people reside, they must behave towards
the government of that country with loyalty, honesty and truthfulness. (TB BI)

They that immerse themselves in the ocean of His utterances should at all
times have the utmost regard for the divinely-revealed ordinances and
prohibitions. Indeed His ordinances constitute the mightiest stronghold
for the protection of the world and the safeguarding of its peoples—a
light upon those who acknowledge and recognize the truth, and a fire unto
such as turn away and deny. (TB TJ)

It is incumbent upon everyone to observe God’s holy commandments, inasmuch
as they are the wellspring of life unto the world. The heaven of divine
wisdom is illumined with the two luminaries of consultation and compassion
and the canopy of world order is upraised upon the two pillars of reward
and punishment. (TB IS)


"PASSION"

O BEFRIENDED STRANGER! The candle of thine heart is lighted by the hand of
My power, quench it not with the contrary winds of self and passion. (HW-P 32)


PATIENCE

O SON OF MAN! For everything there is a sign. The sign of love is
fortitude under My decree and patience under My trials. (HW-A 48)


PEACEFULNESS

Strife leads to
bloodshed and provokes commotion amongst people. Hearken ye unto the Voice
of this Wronged One and deviate not therefrom. (TB KF)

Strife and conflict befit the beasts of the wild. It was through the grace
of God and with the aid of seemly words and praiseworthy deeds that the
unsheathed swords of the Bábí community were returned to their scabbards.
Indeed through the power of good words, the righteous have always
succeeded in winning command over the meads of the hearts of men. (TB LD)

This Wronged One hath forbidden the people of God to engage in contention
or conflict and hath exhorted them to righteous deeds and praiseworthy
character. In this day the hosts that can ensure the victory of the Cause
are those of goodly conduct and saintly character. (TB LD)


REFLECTION

O people of Bahá! The source of crafts, sciences and arts is the power of
reflection. Make ye every effort that out of this ideal mine there may
gleam forth such pearls of wisdom and utterance as will promote the
well-being and harmony of all the kindreds of the earth. (TB KF)


REVERENCE (and respect for RELIGION)

Schools must first train
the children in the principles of religion, so that the Promise and the
Threat recorded in the Books of God may prevent them from the things
forbidden and adorn them with the mantle of the commandments; but this in
such a measure that it may not injure the children by resulting in
ignorant fanaticism and bigotry. (TB KF)

They that are
possessed of wealth and invested with authority and power must show the
profoundest regard for religion. In truth, religion is a radiant light and
an impregnable stronghold for the protection and welfare of the peoples of
the world, for the fear of God impelleth man to hold fast to that which is
good, and shun all evil. Should the lamp of religion be obscured, chaos
and confusion will ensue, and the lights of fairness and justice, of
tranquillity and peace cease to shine. Unto this will bear witness every
man of true understanding. (TB IS)

The purpose of religion as revealed from the heaven of God’s holy Will is
to establish unity and concord amongst the peoples of the world; make it
not the cause of dissension and strife. The religion of God and His divine
law are the most potent instruments and the surest of all means for the
dawning of the light of unity amongst men. The progress of the world, the
development of nations, the tranquillity of peoples, and the peace of all
who dwell on earth are among the principles and ordinances of God. (TB IS)


SACRIFICE

O SON OF MAN! Ponder and reflect. Is it thy wish to die upon thy bed, or
to shed thy life-blood on the dust, a martyr in My path, and so become the
manifestation of My command and the revealer of My light in the highest
paradise? Judge thou aright, O servant! (HW-A 46)


SELF-EXAMINATION

O SON OF BEING! Bring thyself to account each day ere thou art summoned to
a reckoning; for death, unheralded, shall come upon thee and thou shalt be
called to give account for thy deeds. (HW-A 31)

Indeed, there existeth in man a faculty
which deterreth him from, and guardeth him against, whatever is unworthy
and unseemly, and which is known as his sense of shame. This, however, is
confined to but a few; all have not possessed and do not possess
it. (TB KF)


SELF-WORTH

O SON OF MAN! Veiled in My immemorial being and in the ancient eternity of
My essence, I knew My love for thee; therefore I created thee, have
engraved on thee Mine image and revealed to thee My beauty. (HW-A 3)

O SON OF BEING! Thou art My lamp and My light is in thee. Get thou from it
thy radiance and seek none other than Me. For I have created thee rich and
have bountifully shed My favor upon thee. (HW-A 11)

O SON OF BEING! With the hands of power I made thee and with the fingers
of strength I created thee; and within thee have I placed the essence of
My light. Be thou content with it and seek naught else, for My work is
perfect and My command is binding. Question it not, nor have a doubt
thereof. (HW-A 12)

Confession of sins and
transgressions before human beings is not permissible, as it hath never
been nor will ever be conducive to divine forgiveness. Moreover such
confession before people results in one’s humiliation and abasement, and
God—exalted be His glory—wisheth not the humiliation of His servants. (TB BI)

SELFLESSNESS

O SON OF MAN! If thou lovest Me, turn away from thyself; and if thou
seekest My pleasure, regard not thine own... (HW-A 7)


STEADFASTNESS

O MY CHILDREN! I fear lest, bereft of the melody of the dove of heaven, ye
will sink back to the shades of utter loss, and, never having gazed upon
the beauty of the rose, return to water and clay. (HW-P 13)

The second Tajallí is to remain steadfast in the Cause of God—exalted be
His glory—and to be unswerving in His love. And this can in no wise be
attained except through full recognition of Him; and full recognition
cannot be obtained save by faith in the blessed words: ‘He doeth
whatsoever He willeth.’ (TB TJ)

Consider how abject is the state of the disbelievers. They
all give utterance to the words: ‘Verily He is to be praised in His deeds
and is to be obeyed in His behest.’ Nevertheless if We reveal aught which,
even to the extent of a needle’s eye, runneth counter to their selfish
ways and desires, they will disdainfully reject it. (TB TJ)


TACT (& "TEACHING)

O SON OF DUST! The wise are they that speak not unless they obtain a
hearing, even as the cup-bearer, who proffereth not his cup till he
findeth a seeker, and the lover who crieth not out from the depths of his
heart until he gazeth upon the beauty of his beloved. Wherefore sow the
seeds of wisdom and knowledge in the pure soil of the heart, and keep them
hidden, till the hyacinths of divine wisdom spring from the heart and not
from mire and clay. (HW-P 36)

Defile not your tongues with the
cursing and reviling of any soul, and guard your eyes against that which
is not seemly. Set forth that which ye possess. If it be favourably
received, your end is attained; if not, to protest is vain. (TB BI)

Leave ye unto themselves the immature ones
of the world—they that are moved by selfish desire and cling to the
exponents of idle fancy. (TB KF)


THANKFULNESS

We yield praise unto God—hallowed and glorified be He—for whatsoever He
hath graciously revealed in this blessed, this glorious and incomparable
Day. Indeed if everyone on earth were endowed with a myriad tongues and
were to continually praise God and magnify His Name to the end that
knoweth no end, their thanksgiving would not prove adequate for even one
of the gracious favours We have mentioned in this Tablet. Unto this
beareth witness every man of wisdom and discernment, of understanding and
knowledge. (TB BI)


TRUTHFULNESS

One should not ignore the truth of any matter, rather
should one give expression to that which is right and true. The people of
Bahá should not deny any soul the reward due to him, should treat
craftsmen with deference, and, unlike the people aforetime, should not
defile their tongues with abuse. (TB TA)

In these days truthfulness and sincerity are sorely afflicted in the
clutches of falsehood, and justice is tormented by the scourge of
injustice. The smoke of corruption hath enveloped the whole world in such
wise that naught can be seen in any direction save regiments of soldiers
and nothing is heard from any land but the clashing of swords. We beseech
God, the True One, to strengthen the wielders of His power in that which
will rehabilitate the world and bring tranquillity to the nations. (TB TA)

In this Day the secrets of the earth are laid bare before the eyes of men.
The pages of swiftly-appearing newspapers are indeed the mirror of the
world. They reflect the deeds and the pursuits of divers peoples and
kindreds. They both reflect them and make them known. They are a mirror
endowed with hearing, sight and speech. This is an amazing and potent
phenomenon. However, it behoveth the writers thereof to be purged from the
promptings of evil passions and desires and to be attired with the raiment
of justice and equity. They should enquire into situations as much as
possible and ascertain the facts, then set them down in writing. (TB TA)

Fair speech and truthfulness, by reason of their
lofty rank and position, are regarded as a sun shining above the horizon
of knowledge. (TB TA)


TRUSTWORTHINESS

Trustworthiness is the greatest portal
leading unto the tranquillity and security of the people. In truth the
stability of every affair hath depended and doth depend upon it. (TB TA)

We will now mention unto thee Trustworthiness and the station thereof in
the estimation of God, thy Lord, the Lord of the Mighty Throne. One day of
days We repaired unto Our Green Island. Upon Our arrival, We beheld its
streams flowing, and its trees luxuriant, and the sunlight playing in
their midst. Turning Our face to the right, We beheld what the pen is
powerless to describe; nor can it set forth that which the eye of the Lord
of Mankind witnessed in that most sanctified, that most sublime, that
blest, and most exalted Spot. Turning, then, to the left We gazed on one
of the Beauties of the Most Sublime Paradise, standing on a pillar of
light, and calling aloud saying: “O inmates of earth and heaven! Behold ye
My beauty, and My radiance, and My revelation, and My effulgence. By God,
the True One! I am Trustworthiness and the revelation thereof, and the
beauty thereof. I will recompense whosoever will cleave unto Me, and
recognize My rank and station, and hold fast unto My hem. I am the most
great ornament of the people of Bahá, and the vesture of glory unto all
who are in the kingdom of creation. I am the supreme instrument for the
prosperity of the world, and the horizon of assurance unto all beings.”
Thus have We sent down for thee that which will draw men nigh unto the
Lord of creation. (TB IS)


UNITY

O CHILDREN OF MEN! Know ye not why We created you all from the same dust?
That no one should exalt himself over the other. Ponder at all times in
your hearts how ye were created. Since We have created you all from one
same substance it is incumbent on you to be even as one soul, to walk with
the same feet, eat with the same mouth and dwell in the same land, that
from your inmost being, by your deeds and actions, the signs of oneness
and the essence of detachment may be made manifest. (HW-A 68)

Be not the cause of grief, much less of discord and
strife. The hope is cherished that ye may obtain true education in the
shelter of the tree of His tender mercies and act in accordance with that
which God desireth. Ye are all the leaves of one tree and the drops of one
ocean. (TB BI)

In these days it is incumbent upon everyone to adhere tenaciously unto
unity and concord and to labour diligently in promoting the Cause of God,
that perchance the wayward souls may attain that which will lead unto
abiding prosperity. (TB KF)

O ye men of wisdom among nations!
Shut your eyes to estrangement, then fix your gaze upon unity. Cleave
tenaciously unto that which will lead to the well-being and tranquillity
of all mankind. This span of earth is but one homeland and one habitation.
It behoveth you to abandon vainglory which causeth alienation and to set
your hearts on whatever will ensure harmony. (TB KF)

We enjoin upon them that are the
emblems of His names and attributes to firmly adhere henceforth unto that
which hath been set forth in this Most Great Revelation, not to allow
themselves to become the cause of strife, and, until the end that knoweth
no end, to keep their eyes directed towards the dayspring of these
resplendent words which have been recorded in this Tablet. Strife leads to
bloodshed and provokes commotion amongst people. Hearken ye unto the Voice
of this Wronged One and deviate not therefrom. (TB KF)

The sixth Ishráq is union and concord amongst the children of men. From
the beginning of time the light of unity hath shed its divine radiance
upon the world, and the greatest means for the promotion of that unity is
for the peoples of the world to understand one another’s writing and
speech. In former Epistles We have enjoined upon the Trustees of the House
of Justice either to choose one language from among those now existing or
to adopt a new one, and in like manner to select a common script, both of
which should be taught in all the schools of the world. Thus will the
earth be regarded as one country and one home. The most glorious fruit of
the tree of knowledge is this exalted word: Of one tree are all ye the
fruit, and of one bough the leaves. Let not man glory in this that he
loveth his country, let him rather glory in this that he loveth his kind. (TB IS)


WISDOM (and avoidance of Folly)

O CHILDREN OF THE DIVINE AND INVISIBLE ESSENCE! Ye shall be hindered from
loving Me and souls shall be perturbed as they make mention of Me. For
minds cannot grasp Me nor hearts contain Me. (HW-A 66)

O SON OF MY HANDMAID! Guidance hath ever been given by words, and now it
is given by deeds. Every one must show forth deeds that are pure and holy,
for words are the property of all alike, whereas such deeds as these
belong only to Our loved ones. Strive then with heart and soul to
distinguish yourselves by your deeds. In this wise We counsel you in this
holy and resplendent tablet. (HW-P 76)

In this Day whatsoever serveth to reduce blindness
and to increase vision is worthy of consideration. This vision acteth as
the agent and guide for true knowledge. Indeed in the estimation of men of
wisdom keenness of understanding is due to keenness of vision. The people
of Bahá must under all circumstances observe that which is meet and seemly
and exhort the people accordingly.

In brief, dissensions among various sects have opened the way to weakness.
Each sect hath picked out a way for itself and is clinging to a certain
cord. Despite manifest blindness and ignorance they pride themselves on
their insight and knowledge. Among them are mystics who bear allegiance to
the Faith of Islám, some of whom indulge in that which leadeth to idleness
and seclusion. (TB KF)

This Wronged One hath invariably treated the wise with affection. By the
wise is meant men whose knowledge is not confined to mere words and whose
lives have been fruitful and have produced enduring results. It is
incumbent upon everyone to honour these blessed souls. (TB KF)

Above all else, the greatest gift
and the most wondrous blessing hath ever been and will continue to be
Wisdom. It is man’s unfailing Protector. It aideth him and strengtheneth
him. Wisdom is God’s Emissary and the Revealer of His Name the Omniscient.
Through it the loftiness of man’s station is made manifest and evident. It
is all-knowing and the foremost Teacher in the school of existence. It is
the Guide and is invested with high distinction. (TB KF)

O people of God! Righteous men of learning who dedicate themselves to the
guidance of others and are freed and well guarded from the promptings of a
base and covetous nature are, in the sight of Him Who is the Desire of the
world, stars of the heaven of true knowledge. It is essential to treat
them with deference. (TB LD)


OTHER QUOTES OF INTEREST

O SON OF BEAUTY! By My spirit and by My favor! By My mercy and by My
beauty! All that I have revealed unto thee with the tongue of power, and
have written for thee with the pen of might, hath been in accordance with
thy capacity and understanding, not with My state and the melody of My
voice. (HW-A 67)

O YE SONS OF SPIRIT! Ye are My treasury, for in you I have treasured the
pearls of My mysteries and the gems of My knowledge. Guard them from the
strangers amidst My servants and from the ungodly amongst My people. (HW-A 69)

O YE DWELLERS IN THE HIGHEST PARADISE! Proclaim unto the children of
assurance that within the realms of holiness, nigh unto the celestial
paradise, a new garden hath appeared, round which circle the denizens of
the realm on high and the immortal dwellers of the exalted paradise.
Strive, then, that ye may attain that station, that ye may unravel the
mysteries of love from its wind-flowers and learn the secret of divine and
consummate wisdom from its eternal fruits. Solaced are the eyes of them
that enter and abide therein! (HW-P 18)

O MY SERVANT! Thou art even as a finely tempered sword concealed in the
darkness of its sheath and its value hidden from the artificer’s
knowledge. Wherefore come forth from the sheath of self and desire that
thy worth may be made resplendent and manifest unto all the world. (HW-P 72)

... call thou to mind the one who sentenced Jesus to
death. He was the most learned of his age in his own country, whilst he
who was only a fisherman believed in Him. Take good heed and be of them
that observe the warning. (TB TC)

O concourse of bishops! Ye are the stars of the heaven of My knowledge. My
mercy desireth not that ye should fall upon the earth. My justice,
however, declareth: ‘This is that which the Son hath decreed.’ And
whatsoever hath proceeded out of His blameless, His truth-speaking,
trustworthy mouth, can never be altered. (TB TC)

Beware lest the sayings of
the heedless sadden thee. Be thou steadfast in the Cause, and teach the
people with consummate wisdom. (TB TC)

We cherish the hope that through the earnest endeavours of such as are the
exponents of the power of God—exalted be His glory—the weapons of war
throughout the world may be converted into instruments of reconstruction
and that strife and conflict may be removed from the midst of men. (TB BI)

The first Tajallí which hath dawned from the Day-Star of Truth is the
knowledge of God—exalted be His glory. And the knowledge of the King
of everlasting days can in no wise be attained save by recognizing Him
Who is the Bearer of the Most Great Name... True belief in God and
recognition of Him cannot be complete save by acceptance of that which
He hath revealed and by observance of whatsoever hath been decreed by
Him and set down in the Book by the Pen of Glory. (TB TJ)

O God, my God! Adorn the heads of Thy loved
ones with the crown of detachment and attire their temples with the
raiment of righteousness. (TB KF)

The people of Bahá burn brightly amidst the gatherings even as a candle
and hold fast unto that which God hath purposed. This station standeth
supreme above all stations. Well is it with him who hath cast away the
things that the people of the world possess, yearning for that which
pertaineth unto God, the Sovereign Lord of eternity. (TB KF)

That which the aforesaid persons [mystics, certain Sufis] have
mentioned concerning the stations of Divine Unity will conduce in no
small measure to idleness and vain imaginings. These mortal men have
evidently set aside the differences of station and have come to regard
themselves as God, while God is immeasurably exalted above all
things. Every created being however revealeth His signs which are but
emanations from Him and not His Own Self. All these signs are
reflected and can be seen in the book of existence, and the scrolls
that depict the shape and pattern of the universe are indeed a most
great book. Therein every man of insight can perceive that which would
lead to the Straight Path and would enable him to attain the Great
Announcement. Consider the rays of the sun whose light hath
encompassed the world. The rays emanate from the sun and reveal its
nature, but are not the sun itself. Whatsoever can be discerned on
earth amply demonstrateth the power of God, His knowledge and the
outpourings of His bounty, while He Himself is immeasurably exalted
above all creatures. (TB KF)

The fear of God hath
ever been a sure defence and a safe stronghold for all the peoples of the
world. It is the chief cause of the protection of mankind, and the supreme
instrument for its preservation. (TB KF)

The Pen of the Most High
exhorteth, at this moment, the manifestations of authority and the sources
of power, namely the kings, the sovereigns, the presidents, the rulers,
the divines and the wise, and enjoineth them to uphold the cause of
religion, and to cleave unto it. Religion is verily the chief instrument
for the establishment of order in the world and of tranquillity amongst
its peoples. The weakening of the pillars of religion hath strengthened
the foolish and emboldened them and made them more arrogant. Verily I say:
The greater the decline of religion, the more grievous the waywardness of
the ungodly. This cannot but lead in the end to chaos and
confusion. (TB KF)

The faults of kings, like their favours, can be great. A king who is not
deterred by the vainglory of power and authority from observing justice,
nor is deprived of the splendours of the day-star of equity by luxury,
riches, glory or the marshalling of hosts and legions shall occupy a high
rank and a sublime station amongst the Concourse on high. It is incumbent
upon everyone to extend aid and to manifest kindness to so noble a soul.
Well is it with the king who keepeth a tight hold on the reins of his
passion, restraineth his anger and preferreth justice and fairness to
injustice and tyranny. (TB KF)

In the city of justice it is the unrivalled
Speaker Who, in the year nine, illumined the world with the joyful tidings
of this Revelation. And it was this peerless Source of wisdom that at the
beginning of the foundation of the world ascended the stair of inner
meaning and when enthroned upon the pulpit of utterance, through the
operation of the divine Will, proclaimed two words. The first heralded the
promise of reward, while the second voiced the ominous warning of
punishment. The promise gave rise to hope and the warning begat fear. Thus
the basis of world order hath been firmly established upon these twin
principles. (TB KF)

We have formerly ordained that people should converse in two languages,
yet efforts must be made to reduce them to one, likewise the scripts of
the world, that men’s lives may not be dissipated and wasted in learning
divers languages. Thus the whole earth would come to be regarded as one
city and one land. (TB KF)

The purging of such deeply-rooted and
overwhelming corruptions cannot be effected unless the peoples of the
world unite in pursuit of one common aim and embrace one universal
faith. (TB KF)

Wherefore fear ye, O My
well-beloved ones? Who is it that can dismay you? A touch of moisture
sufficeth to dissolve the hardened clay out of which this perverse
generation is moulded. The mere act of your gathering together is enough
to scatter the forces of these vain and worthless people. (TB LD)

Every man of insight will, in this day, readily admit that the counsels
which the Pen of this Wronged One hath revealed constitute the supreme
animating power for the advancement of the world and the exaltation of its
peoples. (TB LD)

Watch over yourselves, for the Evil One is lying in wait,
ready to entrap you. Gird yourselves against his wicked devices, and, led
by the light of the name of the All-Seeing God, make your escape from the
darkness that surroundeth you. Let your vision be world-embracing, rather
than confined to your own self. The Evil One is he that hindereth the rise
and obstructeth the spiritual progress of the children of men. (TB LD)

The summons and the message which We gave were never
intended to reach or to benefit one land or one people only. Mankind in
its entirety must firmly adhere to whatsoever hath been revealed and
vouchsafed unto it. Then and only then will it attain unto true liberty. (TB LD)

Whilst in the Prison of Akká, We revealed in the Crimson Book that which
is conducive to the advancement of mankind and to the reconstruction of
the world. The utterances set forth therein by the Pen of the Lord of
creation include the following which constitute the fundamental principles
for the administration of the affairs of men:

  First: It is incumbent upon the ministers of the House of Justice to
  promote the Lesser Peace so that the people of the earth may be
  relieved from the burden of exorbitant expenditures. This matter is
  imperative and absolutely essential, inasmuch as hostilities and
  conflict lie at the root of affliction and calamity.

  Second: Languages must be reduced to one common language to be
  taught in all the schools of the world.

  Third: It behoveth man to adhere tenaciously unto that which will promote
  fellowship, kindliness and unity.

  Fourth: Everyone, whether man or woman, should hand over to a
  trusted person a portion of what he or she earneth through trade,
  agriculture or other occupation, for the training and education of
  children, to be spent for this purpose with the knowledge of the
  Trustees of the House of Justice.

  Fifth: Special regard must be paid to agriculture. Although it hath
  been mentioned in the fifth place, unquestionably it precedeth the
  others.  Agriculture is highly developed in foreign lands, however
  in Persia it hath so far been grievously neglected. It is hoped that
  His Majesty the Sháh—may God assist him by His grace—will turn his
  attention to this vital and important matter.

  Were men to strictly observe that which the Pen of the Most High
  hath revealed in the Crimson Book, they could then well afford to
  dispense with the regulations which prevail in the world. (TB LD)

In formulating the principles and laws a part hath been devoted to
penalties which form an effective instrument for the security and
protection of men. However, dread of the penalties maketh people desist
only outwardly from committing vile and contemptible deeds, while that
which guardeth and restraineth man both outwardly and inwardly hath been
and still is the fear of God. (TB LD)


GENERAL PURPOSE GRIEF

O SON OF SPIRIT! Noble have I created thee, yet thou hast abased thyself.
Rise then unto that for which thou wast created. (HW-A 22)

O YE THAT ARE LYING AS DEAD ON THE COUCH OF HEEDLESSNESS! Ages have
passed and your precious lives are well-nigh ended, yet not a single
breath of purity hath reached Our court of holiness from you. Though
immersed in the ocean of misbelief, yet with your lips ye profess the one
true faith of God. Him whom I abhor ye have loved, and of My foe ye have
made a friend. Notwithstanding, ye walk on My earth complacent and
self-satisfied, heedless that My earth is weary of you and everything
within it shunneth you. Were ye but to open your eyes, ye would, in truth,
prefer a myriad griefs unto this joy, and would count death itself better
than this life. (HW-P 20)

O SON OF DESIRE! The learned and the wise have for long years striven and
failed to attain the presence of the All-Glorious; they have spent their
lives in search of Him, yet did not behold the beauty of His countenance.
Thou without the least effort didst attain thy goal, and without search
hast obtained the object of thy quest. Yet, notwithstanding, thou didst
remain so wrapt in the veil of self, that thine eyes beheld not the beauty
of the Beloved, nor did thy hand touch the hem of His robe. Ye that have
eyes, behold and wonder. (HW-P 22)

O YE SEEMING FAIR YET INWARDLY FOUL! Ye are like clear but bitter water,
which to outward seeming is crystal pure but of which, when tested by the
divine Assayer, not a drop is accepted. Yea, the sun beam falls alike upon
the dust and the mirror, yet differ they in reflection even as doth the
star from the earth: nay, immeasurable is the difference! (HW-P 25)

O REBELLIOUS ONES! My forbearance hath emboldened you and My
long-suffering hath made you negligent, in such wise that ye have spurred
on the fiery charger of passion into perilous ways that lead unto
destruction. Have ye thought Me heedless or that I was unaware? (HW-P 64)

O CHILDREN OF FANCY! Know, verily, that while the radiant dawn breaketh
above the horizon of eternal holiness, the satanic secrets and deeds done
in the gloom of night shall be laid bare and manifest before the peoples
of the world.

O CHILDREN OF VAINGLORY! For a fleeting sovereignty ye have abandoned My
imperishable dominion, and have adorned yourselves with the gay livery of
the world and made of it your boast. By My beauty! All will I gather
beneath the one-colored covering of the dust and efface all these diverse
colors save them that choose My own, and that is purging from every color.

Consider the people of
former times. What were their deeds and what fruit did they gather? Every
thing they uttered was but imposture and whatever they wrought hath proved
worthless, except for those whom God hath graciously protected through His
power. (TB TA)

Give ear unto that which the people of
tyranny ascribe unto Me in My days. Some of them say: ‘He hath laid claim
to divinity’; others say: ‘He hath devised a lie against God’; still
others say: ‘He is come to foment sedition’. Base and wretched are they.
Lo! They are, in truth, enslaved to idle imaginings. (TB TA)

Gracious God! It was intended that at the time of the manifestation of the
One true God the faculty of recognizing Him would have been developed and
matured and would have reached its culmination. However, it is now clearly
demonstrated that in the disbelievers this faculty hath remained
undeveloped and hath, indeed, degenerated. (TB TJ)

[regarding a certain famous mystic] ... such men are they whose words
are the pride of the world, and whose deeds are the shame of the
nations. (TB KF)

We have said: ‘My imprisonment doeth Me no harm, nor do the things that
have befallen Me at the hands of My enemies. That which harmeth Me is the
conduct of my loved ones who, though they bear My name, yet commit that
which maketh My heart and My pen to lament.’ Such utterances as these have
again and again been revealed, yet the heedless have failed to profit
thereby, since they are captive to their own evil passions and corrupt
desires. (TB KF)

The unbelievers and the faithless have set their minds on four things:
first, the shedding of blood; second, the burning of books; third, the
shunning of the followers of other religions; fourth, the extermination of
other communities and groups. Now however, through the strengthening grace
and potency of the Word of God these four barriers have been demolished,
these clear injunctions have been obliterated from the Tablet and brutal
dispositions have been transmuted into spiritual attributes. (TB LD)

From the lips of
the members of this sect [Shi'ih] foul imprecations fall unceasingly, while they
invoke the word ‘Mal’ún’ (accursed)—uttered with a guttural sound of the
letter ‘ayn—as their daily relish. (TB LD)

The people aforetime joined partners with God, though they professed
belief in His unity; and although they were the most ignorant amongst men,
they considered themselves the most accomplished. But, as a token of
divine retribution upon those heedless ones, their erroneous beliefs and
pursuits have, in this Day of Judgement, been made clear and evident to
every man of discernment and understanding. (TB IS)

Governments should fully acquaint themselves with the conditions of those
they govern, and confer upon them positions according to desert and merit.
It is enjoined upon every ruler and sovereign to consider this matter with
the utmost care that the traitor may not usurp the position of the
faithful, nor the despoiler rule in the place of the trustworthy. Among
the officials who in the past have governed in this Most Great Prison
some, praise be to God, were adorned with justice, but as to others, We
take refuge with God. (TB IS)