---
title: Expanding Replacement Theory
---

# Stupid Ideas

## Or: Actually, You Will Be Replaced

The situation at hand compels a blog post on racism. Yet, one wonders
what I can write that hasn't been written better alreay.

    The theories and policies, so unsound, so pernicious, which deify
    the state and exalt the nation above mankind, which seek to
    subordinate the sister races of the world to one single race,
    which discriminate between the black and the white, and which
    tolerate the dominance of one privileged class over all
    others â€” these are the dark, the false, and crooked doctrines for
    which any man or people who believes in them, or acts upon them,
    must, sooner or later, incur the wrath and chastisement of God.

    	  	    	 -- Shoghi Effendi, _The Promised Day is Come_

One problem I have in writing about certain subjects is I'm unable to
write about a subject without doing verbal violence to something in
the process, some unworthy idea that people foolishly cherish
nevertheless, and I need to shut my mouth lest I provoke a reaction. I
have to confess - I edit away a fair amount of text because when I
review my writings, some of it comes out sounding Just Frickin'
Rude. The text may be hilarious (at least, I imagine it as such), but
I just can't put them out as public postings. It's one thing to be a
restaurant blogger and write an 800-word column ripping up an
overpriced restaurant at Times' Square that will make money no matter
what; it's another to make fun of what someone believes, no matter
how contrary to established fact.

Racism is just such a subject. As a white guy, I feel I have some
responsibility to fix racism in this country, and the most tempting
way to do this is to heap ridicule on the offendors. Like a lotta
white guys, when I first saw the videos of the "Unite the Right" rally
years ago in Charlotte, where guys in golf club shuts changed
"Jews will not replace us," I fantasized a robot army of actual
replacements marching in and violently destroying them. Unfortunately
while it would be fun to fill up a column full of such observations,
it wouldn't contribute to the discussion. And my pique is far
outweight by the injustice suffered by the actual victims. Victims who
are waiting for, y'know, "you white guys who are so bothered about
this stuff to do something about it."

Since I'm an engineer, I have to break every problem down. I can think
of two problems, really that need dismantling. They are :

1. A pseudointellectual movement that seeks to prop up overt racist acts as
somehow defensible; and,

2. More subtle "institutional" racism (for lack of a better term)
caused by _normal human failings._

As you might guess, point #1 is easier to take on and more fun to
write about. Point #2 is harder but the more serious and more
important.

-----------------------------------

For the first part of this column, let's cover point #1 - actual
defenders of racist thought. Unfortunately, we've reached the limits on the
effectiveness of simply speaking out and arguing logically. The notion
that there is an organized "politically correct" movement in the fevered
imaginations of many shows that at this point, those with racist
beliefs are determined to tune out anything that directs tells them to
behave differently. The result has been a roiling pseudointellectual
ferment as those who contribute to the problem seek justify the exact
behaviors that concerned people have been speaking out against. This
is is to be expected; wherever you have evil, you have evil people who
want to justify their actions. As stated by one of Aesop's fables,
"Any excuse will serve a tyrant."

My claim is that the actual sort of racism we see debated today are
just a means of trying to give oneself special rights over another
group. Not just some emotional dislike - this is an effort to make
yourself a favored class, and privilege yourself at the expense of others.

"What about prejudice?," one may ask in response to this. "Isn't that
the root of racism?" Indeed, much that animates white supremacist
beliefs is prejudice. Everyone has prejudices. But someone may be
prejudiced against a group, recognize that, and simply keep their
mouth shut and go about trying to otherwise be a good person. It is
yet another thing to attempt to endlessly intellectualize and justify
one's own prejudices. It isn't simply prejudice that animates racist
behavior; you need to also believe your inclinations are sufficient
justified to elevate yourself and your kind above others. And if you
are personally unprejudiced, but you're the kind of person who seeks
to elevate themselves above others by any means necessary, you
certainly won't be above using the prejudice of others to get your
way. That doesn't make you any less guilty than the prejudiced people
you seek to manipulate.

So while there is an intellectual duty to dismantle the arguments
given by racists for racism, it is to some extent a lost cause;
dismantle one set of arguments, and more will be invented. People have
always sought to elevate themselves over others by unethical means,
and that is not going to end no matter how often you defeat their
arguments. Their arguments must now be more convoluted, due to the
fact obvious racism is seen as disqualifying. But they will seek to
justify the same thing.

* First, we must realize that white supremacists constitute a
  sizeable minority of American society. Euphemisms like *racial
  resentment* won't cut it; there are white supremacists, there are
  lot of them in the US, and fixing this is going to be a
  problem. Please note, however, that very, very few white
  supremacists will claim to be such. They use weasel words to
  distance themselves in discussions very consistently - "I'm just
  raising an issue for discussion," "I don't believe it, but some do,"
  or the favorite, "Some people say..."  Unfortunately, we can see
  their actions, politically or institutionally, and that gives them
  away.

* White supremacists, or their "I'm just asking a question"-wannabes,
  will never overtly say "I am of the master race," and will never
  directly say "I believe those people are inferior." Yet, inevitably,
  such people turn around and state the natural state between the
  races as a to-the-death competition, and they seem inordinately
  concerned with pure-white birthrates seen as falling behind. I
  suspect some of this may be due to fears that [brown people are
  taking all the white women](lets-fix-some-altrighters). In any
  event, their claim is that mankind's heritage of enlightenment
  philosophy and indistrialism is an exclusive birthright of the white
  race, and it is all threatened by encroaching brownness. In this
  context, when they claim not to be white supremacists, who are they
  kidding?  They believe in "separate but equal" for all races - but
  more equal for themselves.

* Likewise, racists may convey more nuanced scientific knowledge about
  races, but this does not make them any less racist. One does not
  need to buy into the outmoded racial thinking of turn-of-the-century
  phrenologists to justify racist beliefs. Some "racial realists"
  instead base their arguments not on superiority of individual races,
  but on bizarre concepts such as racial or ethnic purity - for
  instance, an insistence on proving the intellectual superiority of
  groups that show unusual genetic uniformity, such as Ashkinazi Jews
  or Han Chinese. Their argument is now that the beutiful, superiour
  flower of whiteness, asiannes, blackness, whatever, is endangered by
  mixing, and woe forbid we mongerlize them. This argument, however,
  is entirely instrumental. There are plenty of other examples of
  populations with similar uniformity that they do not hold up as
  examples. And wouldn't you be shocked to know that blacks and
  hispanics in America are much more genetically diverse populations
  than whites hahahahaha who are we kidding?  Racists pick out their
  targets first, then they picked out their argument, not the other
  way around.

* White suprematists are eager to couch their concerns as a defense of
  the "distinctiveness of their culture" and its preservation,
  whatever that is. This "white culture" is generally conflated with a
  bunch of things that White People Say They Like, e.g., things like
  democracy (which lateley the racists seem not to like so much). This
  is an attempt to show that they aren't racists, and the problem
  isn't the color of people; it's just a problem with the way _those
  people_ act. If _those people_ choose to act differently, they can
  be treated the same. Of course, the way _those people_ act is never
  a point of serious discussion; if it were, you can guarantee _those
  people_ acts seem to be exactly _us people_. To give a very specific
  example: depressed rural white manufacturing
  communities now show the exact same social pathologies that depressed
  inner city communities show. No, their understanding of how _those
  people_ are is taken from their own racist press releases and
  twitter feeds, scare stories from the evening news, fictional mass
  murderers from urban myths and tales of "American carnage" from
  cities they've never visited.

* Some racists have even dropped the biological arguments and will now
  happily claim that, all things being equal, a black child "raised
  white" will be culturally "white" and not an inferior. They will use
  as their proof the occasional odd black person they know whose
  political beliefs they approve of, or characters they like from
  funny sitcoms who happen to be black...ish. Unfortunately, actual
  black people in real life can never "cash in" on this ostentible
  equality. If instead of growing up with my white two-parent family
  in Louisville, suppose I instead grew up in Kansas with my single
  white mother, and had an black abseentee father.
  Would those things make me "culturally black" and so alien
  that I was incapable of fitting in in America?  No, duh, I'd be
  white. But if that's the case, how did certain people come to decide
  [this guy](http://en.wikipedia.com/wiki/Barak_Obama) is not only
  culturally black, but so alien that he is incapable of understanding
  democracy in the same way white people are?

This is the crux of the problem - a set of arguments which no longer
pretend to be intellectually based, but are instead emotional appeals
which do nothing more than justify pre-existing agendas. They don't
need to be correct, just complicated and indirect enough that other
people can't easily see what is going on. The treatment of my own
family in society is enough to prove these rickety arguments are
hollow. I'm married to an asian women and we have children. We both
have graduate degrees and in all likelihood, our children will too. Am
I to believe that when they talk about the mongrelization and
bastardization of the races, these people are thinking of me? My guess
is that these manifesto-writers would eagerly overlook all their
careful tenditious research and eagerly declare my spouse and children
"honorary white," at least in the purpose of their common
cause. Indeed, many would use their existing association with friends
like me as proof their aren't racist. But if that's the case, how can
the mixing of races be problemetic and at the same time my children be
model citizens? The most correct explanation is also the simplest:
racism isn't really intellectual in nature. It is a justification of
actions someone wanted to do. Since such people would view it is their
best interests to be nice to my affluent, peacful mixed-race family, I
am not a target of racist acts.

Besides, racists have realized you don't need to get personally
involved to achieve your goals. Political and indirect mechanisms are
the favored mechanism of the racist, not face-to-face
confrontation. This has always been the preferred method of tyrants
and gansters; nobody committing evil really want to get their hands
dirty carrying out the actual evil. Why get involved when a politician
can do that for you? So much of the energy expended by racists is on
using just these mechanisms for getting their way, be it crooked
politicians, underfunded schools or underpaid law enforcement
officials.

Having dealt with that, we are now free to analyze the animus behind
the so-called "great replacement" theory, the idea of shadowy elitists
are behind a secret effort to outbreed white folk. If columnists are
to be believed, this is a dangerous idea with the potential to turn
mere racists into closet radicals and terrorists.

People, there is no sugar-coating this: anyone who _truly_ believes
this stuff is not much better than a flat-earther. One would need to
be unaware of the science to an astounding extent. There has already
been such a confounding mixing of people on the earth that there is no
"pure" race to save. This has been shown to hilarous effect from the
spates of news articles over the past few years in which actual avowed
white suprematists sued genetics testing companies for providing test
results showing they had black or native American blood. Furthermore,
the concern of such people is downright phony when you consider how
many of the men involved in racist movements have serious asian fetishes
and have no problem marrying across bloodlines that way. It is
commonly said that computing farms is what makes the internet go, but
the events of the past few years indicate this is false. Stupidity is
what makes the internet go.

Replacement theory is a ruse. It is well know that the best way to
take your attention off of an obvious flaw within you is to accuse
other people of that flaw. "I'm not lying - you're the one who's
lying." "I'm not a racist, only a racist would call someone a racist,
you racist."  The proponents of replacment theory are trying to
substitute an actual threat - that of being unmasked as a racist -
with a make-believe threat that poses themselves as a victim. So if
that's all it is, why do we see the odd terrorist willing to risk
their lives killing others? Because these are people who badly want to
feel superior. Racists who are discomfited in their views may stop
being racist - or they may double down on their racial views in an
attempt to defend them. It all depends upon how much moral maturity
one has. It takes a fair bit of maturity to change your mind and admit
you were wrong; much less so to hang around people who are looking for
validation of these same beliefs, all the more better to commisertate
with others about misunderstood you are. And the least mature of all
are willing to murder to save face.

So from explicitly white supremacist militants to alt-righters to
self-regarding contrarians and "anti-PC defenders of free speech," all
of them share the same core motivation: "Any excuse will serve a
tyrant."

---------------------------------

But once you dispose of actual racists, you get to the more serious
problem, as I brought up in point #2. Racism as practiced by the
non-racists.

You don't need to be prejudiced to exhibit racist behavior.

Racism is how one treats _aggregate_ groups of people, as they exist
_in the aggregate_. Many people misconceive of this, and erroneously
believe you need prejudiced, personal invective against specific
individuals to be racist or be in a position of power to be
racist. Unfortunately, this lets too many people off the hook. After
all, most people, perhaps including you, dear reader, fulfill social
roles where we have little power over anyone else. The only power most
have is in the voting booth and through who you associate with, what
you donate to, and who you lend your efforts to... actually, you
aren't so powerless, are you? Unfortunately, the fact that our
actions seem small and private don't make the potential for racist
actions any less.

Perhaps the solution is to more clearly define racism. Unfortunately,
even though the Baha'i Faith has been active in its fight against
racism in America since Abdu'l-Baha's first admonisments to the
American believers prior to his 1912 visit, I can find no definition
of racism in the Baha'i writings! So I'll propose one myself:

    The permission one gives oneself to stop treating members of
    certain recognizeable ethnic groups as human beings on occasion.

I came up with definition because I needed one that recognized racism
need not be applied in some sort of intellectually consistent
manner. Hence, the "honorary whiteness" afforded my
affluent mixed-race family, by virtue of our being upstanding members
who pay more than most Americans in taxes, and by my children being
unatheletic enough that that their own eldest son, who they always
wanted to be the football captain, will have nothing to fear competing
against mine. (Let's be honest, the main way I encountered racism as a
child in Kentucky was people complaining that the black kids were
taking up all the slots on the football team. Well, that, and [this
other story](who-killed-community)).

What might be going on? Why would unpredjudiced people behave in
racist manner on occasion? I have a mathematical bent, so I like
thinking of hard-to-solve problems as an example of a more general
problem that may be easier to solve. From that point of view, racism
is nothing more than a special form of a particularly common,
pernicious belief:

    It is ok to treat someone as an object unless you anticipate
    deriving some sort of benefit from associating with them, in which
    case you will treat them as human.

(Apologies to all you philosophy majors, who recognize the plaigarism
immediately.) This belief, stated this baldly, is certainly an immoral
belief, and racism seems a particularly potent example (indeed, so
does sexism). But it's a belief that all of us can confess as to
having at one point or another. So why do people do this?

The answer is simple - because people are jerks.

Oh, I don't mean all the time. We all try to be good people. But in
many cases we fall short. But bad behavior isn't a
mystery. Psychologically, we know exactly when we are going to fall
short. It's due to a sort of lack of willpower.

When do we stop being good? When we're tired. When we're dealing with
someone we don't think we're going to see again. When we're dealing
with someone unimportant. When our blood sugar is low(!). If we're
dealing with low grade depression. When we're hiding behind the wheel
of a car.

On the other hand, we are all angels under certain circumstances. When
someone important is paying attention. If we're attracted to
someone. If we need someone's influence. If that person is our
boss. When we just went to church and want to feel good about
ourselves.

Psychologists and philosophers of evil have long known that we act
toward others is partially determined by the particular situation
we're in. One thing is for sure - if somone you are dealing with is
someone you don't think you'll see again or derive benefit from
continued association with, you'll be more inclined to treat them like
a jerk. If you want to know if you're really a good person, and not
just a conformist, think about how you deal with people you don't like
or who you'll never see again. That's the true test of how moral you
are. And our actions with members of other races are most likely to be
of this sort - the sort of arms-length interactions where we're more
likely to be behaving badly.

That's why when you think of a stereotypical racist, you'll think of
someone who is unpleasant in all sorts of ways. The thing that causes
racism is the same thing that causes some people to yell at their
waiters in the restaurant. It's because that person, decided at some
level that the other person they were dealing didn't merit the effort
necessary to behave decently to the other person. Maybe that person
was tired and having a bad day. But maybe that person is just a jerk.

To the extent that one fixes racism, part of it is awareness and
fixing predjudices. But there is another part where you simply have to
bring up morals across the board to eliminate racism. There will
always be disadvantaged groups - indeed, if you are poor and white and
growing up in the middle of nowhere, you're in one too. And venal
people will misuse you just because they can - just as surely as they
will misuse people of other races.

As a Baha'i, I believe religion is important in cultivating morals
among most people. Perhaps you, gentle reader, are one of the
creatures of sunshine, light and intellect who receives guidance
directly from Inner Light (or Science), and can dispense with the need
of that *pshaww* religious stuff, but consider that perhaps *the rest
of us*, like this poor writer, benefits from such guidance. That would
seem to imply that antiracism is would be an important point of
emphasis for religions - not only because of its evident evil, but
because racist behavior comes from an inheritently negative and venal
place. Unfortunately, religious authorities have done an especially
bad job on this in the past. Baha'i authority Shoghi Effendi noted the
damage done to Christian belief by efforts in the early 20th century
to conform church teachings with their parishoner's own odious racial
beliefs:

    ... racial animosity, has, likewise, led to a marked weakening of
    the Church and to a grave diminution of its spiritual
    influence. Unlike the bold offensive which an avowedly atheistic
    movement had chosen to launch against it... this nationalistic
    philosophy, which Christian rulers and governments have upheld, is
    an attack directed against the Church by those who were previously
    its professed adherents, a betrayal of its cause by its own kith
    and kin.

This whole moral argument seems far removed from the
pseudointellectual claptrap of white supremacist arguments and the
predjudices of you've seen a bigoted relative exhibit. Yet the
difference between an avowed white supremacist and someone with slight
moral failings is less than you might think. Let's examine following
people, who are angels except for one fatal flaw:

* An extremely competent police chief of a major city has a problem
  with a handful of his officers. They've been cited a number of times for
  use of excessive force, and one has been accused of planting
  evidence and wound up on desk leave. His inclination is to let
  things slide; being an officer is a stressful job, and anything more
  severe will involve fighting with the unions.

* A parishoner doesn't like politics and never has. She normally
  doesn't even vote, but this year she's going to vote for someone her
  pastor and fellow parishoners really like. She heard she's done
  racist things - even heard news reports - but she votes for him
  anyway. Those things could all be sensationalized, and anyway, who
  isn't accused of racism at one time or another nowadays?

* The school board is holding a special election on a proposal to
  subdivide the school district. Your neighbor is a vocal supporter of
  this. The school up north, where you live, is the much better of the
  two schools. The southern school serves a more working class
  population with a lot of disadvantaged kids. After the partition,
  the southern school will have a fair bit of trouble due to the loss
  of tax base, and many children from that area will lose access to
  accelerated coursework only available in the school up north. But he
  says this is our children we're talking about - it isn't charity.

Each of these individual people involved are on balance decent human
beings, and none of these acts seem overtly harmful. At worst, they're
the boarderline venal acts that even the best of us produce at times
due to thoughtlessness, carelessness, or "I just can't give a darn
right now, sorry." But the sum of thousands of little such thoughless
acts is to place some ethnic groups at rather sizeable disadvantage
when compared to affluent white communities. You can have significant
institutional racism just from little actions like that. One doesn't
have to look to hard to see that while the intention isn't to cement
privileges of white people and harm people of color, that's the
outcome.

At this point, many writers wring their hands, or try to wrap up the
column on a positive note, or alternately, end their column posing as
the world-weary killjoy. I admit this formulation makes it sound like
a harder problem. But, in fact, at least it is solvable, in that we
know how to fight it. It's a fight we'll have for the rest of our
lives - how to be a good person - so we better get good at it.

So, specifically: if the problem we have is a temptation to badly
treat those people we think we won't benefit with interactions from,
we have two ways to approach this (and we don't have to pick one):

* Stop dehumanizing people; and

* Trick ourselves into thinking we will benefit from our interactions
with others, however unlikely.

This is where the Baha'i stuff comes in. The Baha'i authority Shoghi
Effendi is who I'm going to quote here. He had a particularly tough
task; as the head of the Faith in the early twentieth century, he had
to deal with latent racism and prejudice in the American Baha'i
community, racism that existed in spite of the explicit teachings by
its founders against such thought and actions.  And he had to do it
from an ocean away, in then-Palestine. Aside from directives to his
trusted aides, his only power was guidance through his writings.  This
is what he wrote to the American believers regarding this issue:

> Let the white make a supreme effort in their resolve to contribute
> their share to the solution of this problem, to abandon once for all
> their usually inherent and at times subconscious sense of superiority,
> to correct their tendency toward revealing a patronizing attitude
> towards the members of the other race, to persuade them through their
> intimate, spontaneous and informal association with them of the
> genuineness of their friendship and the sincerity of their intentions,
> and to master their impatience of any lack of responsiveness on the
> part of a people who have received, for so long a period, such
> grievous and slow-healing wounds.
>
>                Shoghi Effendi, _The Advent of Divine Justice_

If you think about it, this seems to get at the crux of what must be
done. But unfortunately, that isn't the end of it. Does it really
address the scenarios I outlined above?

The answer may involve addressing tendencies that have nothing to do
with race.

Naturally, there is a lot that _does_ come from a place of
prejudice. Shoghe Effendi, who is in the main addressing Baha'is,
focuses on the very subtle ways that those of good will may still have
unconscious prejudice (and if you've stuck with me far, I assume
you're in this group). Breaking this down a little:

    ... abandon once for all their usually inherent and at times
    subconscious sense of superiority
    and
    ... correct their tendency toward revealing a patronizing attitude
    towards the members of the other race

are two clauses that refer to tendencies which are particularly
offputting, and particularly troublesome in political
discussions. Think of how jarring it is when a politician lectures at
a black group, as if to make pains to paint himself as being outside
that group. One gets the idea they are speaking not to them, but
themselves or people outside the room. Think therefore, of how rude it
is if this attitude is brought to bear when it informs discussion on a
personal level. But it can easily occur, if expectations for your
listener are so low that you inadvertantly condescend. Likewise,

    ... persuade them through their intimate, spontaneous and informal
    association with them of the genuineness of their friendship and
    the sincerity of their intentions, and to master their impatience
    of any lack of responsiveness on the part of a people who have
    received, for so long a period, such grievous and slow-healing
    wounds.

It is necessary to go at least a little beyond ordinary attempts at
friendship if you are to reach others of a different race. This is
particularly so if someone is restricted to a limited social
circle. (Yes, I realize this can be overdone.)

Beyond this, however, systemic racism can result not from prejudice,
but from ordinary moral failures and venality.

-----------------------------------------------------

Let's examine this. There are particularly insignificant-seeming moral
failures which contribute to this "structural racism." Let's break
this down to some specifics:

** BACKBITING **





