---
title: Revisiting Josiah Royce
---

# Revisiting Josiah Royce

I have elsewhere published a post detailing the [loss of interest in
idealism in the early twentieth century](). I have also elsewhere
detailed, in a [too-long blog post](), the state of affairs whereby
twentieth and twenty-first century philosophy seems to have abandoned
many fruitful lines of inquiry and settled, instead, on certain fixed
concerns. This post is the corrective - an overview of one of the more
interesting philosopher's, at least from the point of view of someone
interested in spirituality and religious community life.

So what does one do, if one wishes to study once-vital concepts such
as ideas of "divinity" and "human purpose"? Particularly when most
serious philosophers are atheistic by creed, and functionally
agnostic? Is there anything remotely "modern"?

To this end, I'd like to introduce:

    Josiah Royce (1855-1916)

Never heard of him, eh? Well, it's not surprising. He fell out of
interest, along with his idealistic contemporaries. It's high time his
works were revisited, if for no other reason than the quote from
'Abdu'l-Baha that I started with: the serious study of the "divine,"
independent of any relgious creeds.

[Josiah Royce]() was a proponent of a now little-known school that you
might call "American Idealism." As far as this goes, it is related to
the much better known "British Idealism of the late nineteenth centry
that fell badly out of favor when the analytic philosophy took over
the field entirely within the english speaking world. While Royce was
an idealist, he was also a contemporary of the early pioneers of an
influential American philosophical school called Pragmatism, and his
influence of and by the pragmatists sets him apart from pure
idealists. His later works, in particular, incorporated pragmatist
writer C. S. Pierce's idea of *signs* as metaphysically
significant. His intellectual sparring partner was William James, and
they held each other in the greatest respect. Unfortunately, after his
death his reputation fell on hard times; in the early twentieth
century, Bertrand Russel, G. E. Moore and their contemporaries set the
tone for philosophy in the twentieth century. Where the school lives
on, it is in midcentury writers known more for their conservatism than
their idealism; e.g. Oakenshott.

This is unfortunate. Royce and other related writers have much to say
about this "divine philosophy," all without ever straying too much into
sectarian ideology or the dogmas of their own chosen faiths. My
opinion is Baha'is, and anyone interested in spirituality and the
function of spiritual communities, would benefit from revisiting this
underappreciated philosophy. In this article, I'd like to discuss
some of the topics covered by Royce's writing that would benefit
Baha'i scholarship.

## Josiah Royce: Some Critical Ideas

For all his popular obscurity, Josiah Royce is still a figure of some
interest in philosophy, and not only for historical reasons. So if you
look at [his entry in the Stamford Encylopedia of Philosopy]( ),
you'll find a sizeable analysis of his main ideas. This is far more
than I can cover in a single post, and the writers of this article are
far more informed than. If you wish to read him directly, this is
easy, thanks to Amazon's inclusion in their Kindle selection of _The
Basic Writings of Josiah Royce, Volumes I and II_ (ed. John McDermott
Fordham University Press 2015). Thanks to the release of the Open
Access edition in 2018, this massive volume cost me a grand total of
four bucks.

What's in there? A lot about metaphysics (the underlying nature of
things), epistemology (how we know things) and logic. There are
interesting in and of themselves; in his writings, Royce reveals
himself to be a bridge between the Hegelenianism of his younger
studies and the America pragmatists whome he corresponded frequently
with. But for anyone interested in spirituality and
spiritual community life, he has particular concerns that make study
rewarding. A quick scan of the titles will show an eagerness to
backfill the void in the "development of the ideal virtues" created
when science and materialist philosophies raced ahead in early
twentieth century development: words and phrases like "the conception
of God," "monotheism, "immortality," "conceptions of Being" set him
apart from emperecists eager to scrub their writings free from mention
of anything vaguely spitual, while concerns like "the Great Community,"
"international insurance," "provincialism" and "race questions" mark
him as someone concerned enough with issues of applied
philosophy that he does not limit himself to areas where rigorous
thinking alone cannot guarantee freedom from error. While I admire the
eagerness of the analytic philosophers for rigor and respect their
foundationalism, these tools to not lend themselves to analysis of
these concerns, but that does not make them any less vital.

So enough with my chatter: here's my synopsis of some of the more
interesting writings:




