---
title: Josiah Royce: Some Idealistic Writings
---

# Josiah Royce: Some Idealistic Writings

Josiah Royce (1855-1916) is an American Philosophical idealist of the
late nineteenth century. Although he was contemporary with the great
pragmatic philosophers, with whom he worked with a great deal, he was
closer in spirit to the British Idealists of the time, earning him the
nickname of "the Hegel of America." I've discussed some of the
background [here](whither-idealism) and [here](revisitng-royce).

He's mainly known for his idealistic writings; it is what established
his early philosophical career and it is an outlook that informed the
rest of his writings. So this is what I'll start this survey on. Later
posts will discuss some more explicitly religious writings and some of
his social commentary.

## "The Fourth Conception of Being" and Related Talks

Josiah Royce started as an idealist; far from being the first
idealist, he was by now defending a long philosophical
tradition. While the tradition has many defenders, the most common
scoffers were from the "common-sense" school of empericism - that is,
if you can't point to it, it ain't there. Some of his most important
work is in refutation of that idea.

"The Fourth Conception of Being" is the last paper in a series of
papers which elaborate his conception in the anthology, the other two
being "The Religious Problems and The Theory of Being," and "The
Internal and External Meaning of Ideas."  The first was taken from an
earlier talk and expanded; the other two were later printed in _The
World and the Individual_, a two-volume work printed 1899-1901 which
is probably Royce's most important middle-period writing, and the most
critical one as far as his idealistic philosophy.  I've titled this
section after the last paper of the three, as "the four conceptions of
being" is probably Royce's most important contribution to idealistic
philosophy.

In these papers, Royce elaborates four of what he calls "conceptions
of being," to explain exactly why we cannot rest easy with the claims
of the empericists. He begins with almost a half-hearted apology of
his treatment of the subject: "It is pretentious to wrestle with
angels; but there are some blessings that you cannot win in any other
way." And regarding those who would simply ignore metaphysics: "...the
dreariness which men often impute to Metaphysics, is merely the
dreariness of not understanding the subject,—a sort of dreariness for
which indeed there is no help except learning to understand."

Early in the first paper, he introduces his purpose: "My precise
undertaking then, in the following lectures, is to show what we mean
by Being in general, and by the special sorts of Reality that we
attribute to God, to the World, and to the Human Individual." In other
words, he is going to clarify what is meant in terms of Being, and
show various conceptions of this. In relation to this, he then
introduces the concept of Idea:

    In brief, an idea, in my present definition may, and, as a fact
    always does, if you please, appear to be representative of a fact
    existent beyond itself. But the primary character, which makes it
    an idea, is not this its representative character, is not its
    vicarious assumption of the responsibility of standing for a being
    beyond itself, but is its inner character as relatively fulfilling
    the purpose (that is, at presenting the partial fulfillment of the
    purpose), which is in the consciousness of the moment wherein the
    idea takes place. It is in this sense that we speak of any
    artistic idea, as present in the creative mind of the artist. I
    propose, in stating my own view hereafter, to use the word “idea”
    in this general sense.

The conceptions of Being that Royce elaborates are in particular
relation to this world of Idea.

The first conception of being elaborated by Royce is that of the
empericist: of no relation between the two. The physical world is what
it is; and as regard this world of the Idea, it cannot provide any
overt illumination. As stated:

    Conceive it as a realm for pure scientific theory; and, so far as
    your knowledge reaches, it is full at once of the show of a noble
    order, and of hints of a vain chance. On the other hand, conceive
    it as a realm of values, attempt to estimate its worth, and it
    baffles you with caprices, like a charming and yet hopelessly
    wayward child, or like a bad fairy.

Ergo, this view of being presents all fact, and no meaning. There are
a number of ways to handle this:

    The World as Fact is, then, for all of us, persistently baffling,
    unless we find somewhere else the key to it. The philosophers of
    the Platonic type have, however, long ago told us that this defect
    of our world of fact is due, at bottom, simply to the fault of our
    human type of consciousness. And hence a whole realm of
    philosophical inquiry has been devoted, in the best ages of
    speculative thinking, to a criticism of this human type of
    consciousness itself. Upon such a criticism, Plato founded his
    conception of the Ideal World.

Philosophers from Plato onwards have provided their own answers, in an
attempt to imbue the world of fact with some sort of meaning; that is,
tie the world of Being (what is) to the world of Idea (what it means).
In this first world of Being, though, this world of idea cannot be
related to the world of fact. The commonsense view is that Idea is
simply nothing more than mental states, a vapor so ephemeral it
might as well not exist. Royce does not state it so bluntly, but
states it as such:

    “Ideas exist,” says this view, “and they exist as knowing facts
    external to themselves. And this is their fundamental character.”
    Now I myself shall, in these lectures, regard this power of ideas
    to cognize facts external to themselves not as a primal fact of
    existence but as an aspect of ideas which decidedly needs
    reflective consideration, and a very critical restatement. Hence I
    cannot here begin by saying: “Ideas are states of mind that image
    facts external to themselves.” That would be useful enough as a
    definition of ideas in a Psychology of Cognition. For such a
    Psychology would presuppose what we are here critically to
    consider, namely, the very possibility of a cognition of
    Being. But, for the purpose of our present theory, the definition
    of the term “idea” must be made in such wise as not formally to
    presuppose the power of ideas to have cognitive relations to outer
    objects.

The problem is that an idea, far from merely being simply a
temporary wisp, is instead an act of will. You need a thinker, and the
thinker is making a purposeful effort to elaborate upon this idea. But
this elaboration is outside of this first conception, who can do no
more than regard these as unreal beyond the thinker's head. As Royce
says, "with an Independent Being our ideas could simply have nothing
to do." Or as put elsewhere: "whatever Being is, it is not independent
of ideas that refer to it."

Likewise, then, is the idea that ideas are themselves only reflections
of reality; that is to say, any idea we have is itself caused by the
material world, and is nothing more than an impression of this. For
example, "the view that in order to be object of a given idea, the
object must be cause of the idea, or that ideas have to look to their
own causes as their objects, is refuted, as a general definition, by a
glance at the nature of all those temporal objects of which we have
ideas, but which are not now present in time." And likewise "Were one
to persist in such a view, what would he say about all the
mathematical objects? Does the binomial theorem act as a seal, or any
other sort of cause, impressing its image on the wax of a
mathematician’s mind?"

Carrying on from this theme, he then outlines what he thinks of as a
second way of viewing the world of being: the approach of
mysticism. This is essentially the converse of the prior. This is to
regard the world of the experience as the only valid world, and both
worlds of ideas and materials as somehow a mirage. In particular, an
ideas one has are simply vain. There is only personal
experience. While perhaps satisfying to some, philosophically this is
no better. The problem, essentially, is that to do this is to give up
on fact itself and the idea of an independently valid fact: "Being
cannot be defined as the ineffable immediate fact that quenches ideas,
and that makes them all alike illusory".

Furthermore, ideas themselves need an elaboration that is not present
in the other two conceptions. Ideas exist, and can exist as passed one
being to another. But there is more than that:

    But ideas often seem to have a meaning, yes, as one must add,
    finite ideas always undertake or appear to have a meaning, that is
    not exhausted by this conscious internal meaning presented and
    relatively fulfilled at the moment when the idea is there for our
    finite view. The melody sung, the artist’s idea, the thought of
    your absent friend—a thought on which you love to dwell: all these
    not merely have their obvious internal meaning, as meeting a
    conscious purpose by their very presence, but also they at least
    appear to have that other sort of meaning, that reference beyond
    themselves to objects, that cognitive relation to outer facts,
    that attempted correspondence with outer facts, which many
    accounts of our ideas regard as their primary, inexplicable, and
    ultimate character. I call this second, and, for me, still
    problematic and derived aspect of the nature of ideas, their
    apparently External Meaning. In this sense it is that I say, “The
    melody sung by me not only is an idea internally meaning the
    embodiment of my purpose at the instant when I sing it, but also
    is an idea that means, and that in this sense externally means,
    the object called, say, a certain theme which Beethoven composed.”

Royce therefore proposes a third conception of being as a
philosophically rigorous answer to the prior to erroneous
conceptions. The goal is not only to establish the world of
commonsense idea as valid, but also those of idea, in that "amongst
the beings known to common sense, there are many that are regarded as
real beings, but that are still explicitly defined only in terms of
validity. Such beings are the prices and credits of the commercial
world, the social standing of individuals, the constitutions of
Empires, and the moral law." He elaborates this third conception of
being thusly:

    For if one asserts, as his account of the nature of Being, that
    certain ideas of possibilities of experience are valid, he is so
    far left with a world of objects upon his hands whose only
    character, so far as he yet defines the Being of these objects, is
    that these objects are in agreement with his ideas. Such a
    definition of Being constituted the whole outcome of the
    Third Conception.

This third conception of being would be one that allows us to test the
reality and validity of both.  To give an even more explicit example
of something which is totally immaterial, yet can be regarded as
valid, one that fits into neither the first or second conception:

    ... mathematics deals exclusively with entities that are
    explicitly conceived by the science in question as of this third
    type, and of this type only.

The key to this third conception of being is the recognition of
validity; this is the realm of the rigorous philosopher. Royce refers
to this as the "critical rationalist" view. This is the realm of
testability, and the recognition that something need not be real in
the commonsense thing in order to be valid. Yet this third conception
of being has its own limitations:

    Valid in its own measure it is, to say that is to utter the deep
    commonplace of St. Augustine’s form of the ontological proof of
    the existence of God. For it must indeed be true that there is a
    Veritas. Yet mere Veritas, mere validity, still remains to us a
    conception as unintelligible as it is insistently present to our
    thought. And our difficulty at the last time came thus to light:
    In mathematics, you define and prove valid assertions, and deal
    with entities, such as roots of equations, and properties of
    functions, whose Being seems to mean only their validity. But how
    do you prove these propositions about validity? How do you test
    the existence of your mathematical objects? Merely by
    experimenting upon your present ideas. What is there before you as
    you thus experiment? At each step of your procedure, one moment’s
    narrow contents extend to the very horizon horizon of your present
    finite mathematical experience. Yet if your procedure is, indeed,
    as it pretends to be, valid, the truth that you define embraces
    eternity ... the validity is a part of the endless realm of
    mathematical truth, a realm that is, to use Aristotle’s term, the
    Unmoved Mover of all your finite struggle for insight in this
    region. How can the one form of Being be thus ambiguous, unless,
    in constitution, it is also much wealthier in nature than the mere
    abstraction expressed in our Third Conception makes it seem. Or,
    to put the case otherwise, the Third Conception of Being, in
    defining possibilities of experience, tells you only of mere
    abstract universals. But a mere universal is so far a bare what.

So validity itself may be philosophically acceptable, but leads to
simply more questions, it does not give an answer in and of itself. Or
as Rocye further puts it: "... the Third Conception of Being has
reduced Being to Truth, or Validity. But now we need to make out what
constitutes the very essence of Truth itself."

Unfortunately, the third conception cannot be the end. Your
scientifically minded may say that this is the whole story - ideas
exist, insofar as the correspond with the Truth. The problem is that
ideas are not as simple as correspondence:

    ... bare correspondence, the mere possession of common characters
    in idea and in object not only fails to define, but, as we now
    see, can never lead us to define, the Being of either idea or
    object, and in no sense shows or explains to us the relation
    whereby the idea means, selects, and is in just this way true of
    just this one object.

Instead,

    ... the Being to which any idea refers is simply the will of the
    idea more determinately, and also more completely, expressed. Once
    admit this definition of the nature of Being, and you will
    accomplish the end which all the various prior definitions of
    Being actually sought.


Royce first notes that validity itself is not so much an answer in and
of itself, but provides a definite answer of what *cannot* be; by
elaborating on ideas on what cannot be, we can approach knowledge from
a limit-like series, in which alternate possibilities are ruled
out. Likewise, universal judgements are hypothetical - in that they
may always be overturned. But such judgements can still be useful
provided they can be prhased in a way to exclude from reality certain
objects.

For instance:

    2 + 2 = 4

is not simply hypothetical: "nowhere exists, in all the realm of
external validity, a two and a two that, when added, fail to give, as
the result, four." This can be proven and as such, this is no longer
hypothetical, it being the only sum possiible. Such insight is
"destructive of merely abstract possiblities," and even the most
detached mystic must acknowledge the realm of this. And there will be
no "black swan" event where someone finds a situation of "2 + 2 = 3."

But this means that mere reasoning cannot determine what Being truly
is; instead, it can only tell what external reality is not. Long
before the analytic school had run his course - indeed, before it was
even formalized - Royce noted:

    This, in fact, is why mathematical science, especially insofar as
    it deals merely with universal truths, can never hope, by any
    conceivable skill in construction, to replace the more empirical
    sciences, and merely to define the world in terms of its own sort
    of universal validity. For every step of the process is a
    cutting-off indeed of false possibilities, and an assertion of
    what therefore seems the more precisely and determinately limited
    range of the valid possibilities. But at every step, also, the
    range beyond is simply inexhaustible, so far as you take your
    object as merely external. Unless some other principle than that
    of mere negation determines the realm of valid Being, then it has
    no final determination at all.

The question, therefore, is how do you get actual knowldge? And the
answer is by external experience. However, it is not merely the
experience of the mystic, which is an end in itself, but rather that
of *selected experience*. He distinguishes that as a focused
experience through attention. For instance, "a scientific empiricist
has hypotheses,—internal meanings, ideal constructions,—and he
deliberately chooses to submit these to the control of what he views
as external experience." Actual experience involves observation, and
this observation itself is an act of will. We use this experience to
make judgements of the particular.

This can illuminate our ideas, but this attention is still inductive,
and like the former process of validation, it can only indicate what
is not. It can eliminate ideas, not completely validate them. So while
this informs the universal, it cannot define it, as it can with the
particular. Furthermore, anything that moves away from the particular
and towards the universal means losing what makes that thing
particular, and makes direct experience of that impossible.

    ... external experience, in confirming ideas, furnishes a positive
    content which our human internal meanings never can construct for
    themselves, still the service of our external experience, in
    reavealing what is Real, has perfectly obvious limitations. It can
    confirm our hypotheses, but never adequately; for it shows us only
    particular instances that agree with such of our hypotheses as
    succeed.

So how can any actual definite knowledge be reached? "Yet if we could
reach that limit of determination which is all the while our goal, if
our universal judgments were confirmed by an adequate experience, not
of some object (still indeterminate), but of the individual object, or
of all the individual objects, so that no other empirical expression
of our ideas remained possible, then, indeed, we should stand in the
immediate presence of the Real. The Real, then, is, from this point of
view, that which is immediately beyond the whole of our series of
possible efforts to bring, by any process of finite experience and of
merely general conception, our own internal meaning to a complete
determination.

This, then, is the limit of the third conception of being; it lacks a
"a view of the Real as the finally determinate that permits no other."
No matter how elaborate and well-researched our view of the real,
there may also be an equally valid view that is not ruled out.

The fourth conception of being is the final conception, under which
one can find complete knowledge of the real. To illustrate this, he
note the famous philosophical problem posed by the correspondence
theory of truth, that is, what does it mean to correspond. Something
may be true insofar as it is in conformance, but many differing ideas
of an object may be considered true, even ideas that seem to
paradoxically differ. How do we sort these out? "The only answer is in
terms of Purpose. The idea is true if it possesses the sort of
correspondence to its object that the idea itself wants to
possess. Unless that kind of identity in inner structure between idea
and object can be found which the specific purpose embodied in a given
idea demands, the idea is false." Like attention and validity before,
this application of correspondence is an act of will.

    ... apart from such conscious selection, apart from such ideal
    predetermination of the object on the part of the idea, apart from
    such free voluntary submission of the idea to its self-imposed
    task, the object itself, the fact world, in its independence, can
    do nothing either to confirm or refute the idea.

Indeed, anything we know of the material world is conveyed in the
forms of ideas which may or may not be valid, but may only be
determined through application of will. Indeed, the same will that is
used to determine the internal idea. This, then, is where Royce picks
up with Hegel's idea, identifying this insight as that which "led
Hegel to call the world the embodied Idea."

This applies, specifically to the "external" ideas; those that can be
explained from one being to another. What about the concept of an
"internal idea" - can this somehow achieve a fuller correspondence? Or
is it possible that an internal idea is somehow a limited reflection
of an "external idea" which is truthful? In
fact, there is no difference between the two, as external ideas
themselves are only reflections of purpose:

    ... the external meaning must itself be interpreted, not primarily
    in the sense of mere dependence upon the brute facts, but in terms
    of the inner purpose of the idea itself.

Indeed, "There seems to be, in the object of an idea, just insofar as
it is the object of that specific idea, no essential character which
is not predetermined by the purpose, the internal meaning, the
conscious intent, of that idea itself." So we have ideas, and
rejecting the first and second conceptions of being, these ideas exist
and are real, and these ideas are objects of our intent.

Royce then elaborates that the external meaning, far from actually
being external, is actually an important aspect of the _completely
developed_ internal meaning. This completely developed meaning,
elaborated in the external world, through the act of will, is what is
meant by this.

What then of erroneous ideas? Do not the fact that ideas can be in
error mean that ideas are simply incomplete pictures, and real ideas
exist no more than errorneous ideas, which are plainly figments of
imagination with no reality? 

"So some ideas certainly can and do err in as far as they undertake to
be ideas of objects. Ideas can then fail of their desired
correspondence with their intended objects, just because these objects
are indeed other than themselves. But the error of an idea is always a
failure to win the intended aim of the idea, precisely insofar as the
idea sought truth... the very Possibility of Error, the absolutely
certain truth that some ideas give false accounts of their own
objects, shows that some objects contain what is opposed to the intent
of the very ideas that refer to these objects. And so the antithesis
is proved."

Critiquing again some of the materialist conceptions in other
conceptions of being, Royce notes the centrality of ideas as
essentially real to us - indeed, the material world is what is unreal
on some level:

    Whoever says, “I am passive; I merely accept the world as my
    object; I recognize the superior force of this object, and I have
    no part in willing that it is my object,” any such submissive
    observer is invited merely to state what object he means, and what
    idea he has of it. He will at once find his idea arising before
    him as a conscious construction, and he will regard this idea as
    intelligible because he follows its construction with his own
    unity of purpose. The vaster the world that he then defines as the
    overwhelming fate of his intelligence, the larger will be the part
    that his own consciously constructive will has taken in the
    definition of the idea. 

Ideas are our *only* way of apprehending the material world, and they
exist as forces of purpose of our will. Continuing:

    Space, time, past, future, things, minds, laws,—all these
    constituents of the world, our supposed passive spectator of
    universe indeed recognizes as objects other than the ideal
    products of his will; but his ideas of these objects come to him
    precisely as constructive processes, present to his consciousness
    as his own act, and understood by him so far as they are his own
    meaning.

Far from the material world being the thing out there, "When I have an
idea of the world, my idea is a will, _and the world of my idea is
simply my own will itself determinately embodied_" (emphasis by author).

So we have an ideas, and ideas may or may not be true, but they are
the only way we can apprehend being. And these ideas may have
validity. We cannot make universal judgements of validity, only
judgements of particulars, yet the elaboration of our ideas can narrow
down the possibility of what might exist in the world of being, such
that at the end of all of this is complete realization of an
individual idea. This realization is the complete fulfillment of the
inner meaning of the idea and what embodies that idea.

This leads to his final, fourth conception of being:

    What is, or what is real, is as such the complete embodiment, in
    individual form and in final fulfillment, of the internal meaning
    of finite ideas.

This fourth conception of being aims more toward "a certain absolute
system of ideas,—a system, moreover, which is genuinely implied in the
true internal meaning or purpose of every finite idea, however
fragmentary." This elaboration of our ideas can never be completed;
close as it may ever be to full elaboration, its meaning, as
elaborated in the external world, can never be absolute. The Absolute,
as referenced by Royce and so many other idealists, is this actually
fully elaborated Idea as the entire world of Being.

More fully elaborating on this:

    We have now defined what this object is. It is an individual life,
    present as a whole, totum simul, as the scholastics would have
    said. This life is at once a system of facts, and the fulfillment
    of whatever purpose any finite idea, insofar as it is true to its
    own meaning, already fragmentarily embodies. This life is the
    completed will, as well as the completed experience, corresponding
    to the will and experience of any one finite idea. In its
    wholeness the world of Being is the world of individually
    expressed meanings,—an individual life, consisting of the
    individual embodiments of the wills represented by all finite
    ideas.

Note that this statement puts the sentient individual as "the only
ultimate form of Being." Likewise, being itsel is the sum of the
individuals in all of that being. This conception of reality as
essentially humanist in nature informed his other writings,
particularly the social commentary which was eager to break with those
philosophers who embodied what he felt were the excesses of both
individualism and materialism.



**"The Concept of The Absolute and the Dialectical Method"**

This appears to have been from the same series of lectures, but
covering the period after Kant, with the birth of German idealism,
which as you might guess was of particular interest of Royce. The
point here was to outline some of the more problematic views of the
self particular to the idealists.

* points out that German idealism was a reflection of the tendencies
  and problems of German civilization of that age; e.g. the growth of
  romanticism, the emphasis on intellectual and spiritual life caused,
  perhaps by political weakness...

* Kant himself continued the skeptical movement through his most
  prominent writings, the Critiques - on Practical Reason, Pure
  Reason. The result was "negative"; e.g. not a system of ideals, but
  a critique of what was available. The transition away from Kant's
  philosophy to later idealism was a reflection on and a reaction to
  thre ideals in German life - individualism, respect for the
  intellectual life and a somewhat apolitical idealism.

This led to two tropes regarding the inner life - the self as the
heroic individual and sovereign of the new spiritual order, and the
self as the explorer and discoverer of Truth. This herioc
individualism is contrasted with the nihilistic, merciless
individualism of Nietchzsche. Royce himself seems far more positively
inclined toward these idealistic individualists, far more that some of
his contemporaries, quipping "our extreme individualists are fond of
making, as it were, pyramids of the skulls of their enemies." The
heroic individualists of idealism were idealists - and not just in
the philosophical sense.

However, carrying forward from this, the idealists then had their
problem - the absolute, however conceived, was of a conception
directed by the self itself. Man, far from being a product of The
Absolute, was a product of Nature. One way of addressing this was to
keep concepts of The Absolute impersonal, to prevent it being a
creature of man's limited reasoning. Another way was to revisit what
Royce thinks of as a "Hindu" mindset, in considering that The Divine
can best be known through knowledge of our true self. The upshot of
these attitudes, far from leading to a rigorous synthesis of these
tendencies, instead led idealsm to a very distinct tendency of
detached intellectualism and abstraction, parodied by their critics as
nothing but unintelligible phraseology.

Royce states that the answer to this problem was met by use of a very
old philosophical tool: the dialectic. The idea behind the dialectic,
known by many of you who have at least passing knowledge of Hegel, is
that knowledge advances from the synthesis of two opposing thesis that
seem to be in opposition. Or as Royce puts it:

   "...they developed a method which depends upon recognizing that the
   truth is a synthesis of antithetical moments or aspects, which does
   not ignore but unifies opposition."

The upshot is that truth, so defined, becomes a construction:

   "Nothing is true, for them, unless therein the sense, the purpose,
   the meaning of some active process is carried out, expressed,
   accomplished. Truth is not for these post-Kantian idealists
   something dead and settled apart from action. It is a construction,
   a process, an activity, a creation, an attainment." 

While Royce himself was no pragmatist, like pragmatists, he did not
understand truth as being as simple as static correspondence. Like
pragmatists, truth only existed where there was a "cash value" in our
ability to act on it. It is just that as an idealist, that cash value
was toward something rather more abstract. Later lectures would
further illuminate his view of truth, as something being both rigorous
and constructed.


**"Self-Consciousness, Social Consciousness and Nature"**

This wide-ranging paper covers a number of topics, mostly relating to
metaphysics and consciousness itself. In spite of the title, it is
hard to pick out an overarching theme. The goal, ostensibly is to
figure an explanation of how we can be creatures of nature, "the sport
of purely physical law," yet somehow be apart of it as the only
entities with an awareness of both nature and other conscious
creatures with this same awareness of nature and each other. Some of
this prefigures some recent objects of interest.

Here are some of the more interesting ideas:

- Metaphysically, man's social consciousness, that is, his awarenes of
  other sentient beings of mankind, is generally not thought of
  metaphysically significant, and is generally left to ethics. These
  ethicists, moreover, seem to view such relationships from a highly
  abstract view. Royce feels that the consciousness of others, and our
  own self-consciousness (our consciousness of other's awareness of
  us) is just as worthy of consideration, metaphysically. Indeed, the
  only class of objects outside of ourselves that we can verify
  without skepticism that truly exists are the existence of other
  beings.

- Evolution is not just differentiation of one type of animal to
  another. It is also a history of differentiation from one colony to
  the other, one society to another, and to new social orders.

- Our own consciousness, as such, is a product of being in a matrix of
  other beings. Our own self-consciousness, such as it is, is a
  product of our own differentiation of our own needs and our own
  perceptions from others. You cannot imagine the development of a
  distinct consciousness without some *other* with which to define it
  against. Otherwise, one would not be able to contrast the
  "experience as individuall mine" against experience as a whole, and
  would not be able to conceive of experiences just outside of ours.

- Against this, our awareness of nature takes a secondary
  importance. Nature itself is simply a mass of "possibilities of
  sensation." This again is given meaning by the experience of others,
  by which we are able to contrast private experiences and the
  experiences of others against the underlying nature of a
  thing-as-such. Indeed, the only way we can accurately confirm facts
  is by communicating with other beings that they do, in fact, agree
  with the same fact as we see them.

- Royce borrows some ideas from Pierce about consciousness, along with
  some of his own. Namely, that consciousness itself is about the will
  and decision, and habits, such as everyone falls prey to, are indeed
  signs of fainter consciousness within us. Under this framework, the
  consciousness of the animals exists but at a very much lower level,
  these animals themselves being dominated by habit. Indeed, under
  timelines of extremely long nature, even matter itself can be said
  to be dimly conscious, were you to grant that these "habits of
  nature" (e.g. physical laws) are themselves a sign of
  consciousnessness somehow, however dim. Why do we not communicate
  with these? Because we do not live at the same scale.

**"The Religious Problems and the Theory of Being"**
**"The Internal and External Meaning of Ideas"**

These two papers from Rocye's middle period discuss some of his ideas
on _ideas_. In particular, as an idealist, he views ideas as
particularly significant; to a true idealist, our philosophical world
is made up of ideas of this sort much the same way that atoms make up
the world for materialists.

To start with, Royce views the study of these ideas as the basis for
philosophical reason. The material world, on the other hand, is the
world of brute facts; things just _are_; it is the scientific theories
about our world that is noble, and these scientific theories persist
in turning up baffling irregularities in the world of fact. He regards
both mysticism and neoplatonism as philosophies that attempted to over
come such irregularities through simple disregard of the world of
fact.

Ideas, such as the scientific theories, are something that can be
known, and it is important that these ideas relate to reality. But the
idea exists in a reality not in the world of fact; instead, it is only in the
consciousness of a person; and it is significant only in that the idea
embodies an _act of will_. Royce is emphatic on this point - it is
simply not possible separate an idea from the act of will that could
potentially embody it. Whether this act of will is carried out - or
even possible to carry out - is of no import. That will is how the
world of idea is carried out into reality. The actions of people and
less sentient creatures all carry out ideas that create this
reality. (Other writings elaborate that less sentient beings are also
carrying out ideas, albeit ones that are instinctual or force of
habit; indeed, material objects themselves carry out "ideas" in the
laws of nature.)

    Whatever else our ideas are, and however much or little they may
    be, at any moment, expressed in rich, sensuous imagery, it is
    certain that they are ideas not because they are masses or series
    of images, but because they embody present conscious
    purposes. Every idea is as much a volitional process as it is an
    intellectual process.

Being then becomes our existence as we carry out ideas:

    To be means simply to express, to embody the complete internal
    meaning of a certain absolute system of ideas,—a system, moreover,
    which is genuinely implied in the true internal meaning or purpose
    of every finite idea, however fragmentary.

And The Meaning (in the philosophical sense) is founded in the Will
and Purpose that caries out these ideas. This underlies his theory of
immortality of beings outlined elsewhere: a being is a bit like an
irrational number that goes on forever, and the process of being is
the will to embody an idea that, much like an irrational number, will
approach its limit only at infinity.

It is important to note that even physical processes are themselves
ideas coming into being. Royce is notable in that he treats the
abstract ideas as being just as worth of consideration,
metaphysically, as the concrete ideas in reality. He contrasts this
attidue toward a prior materialist conception:

    When Mr. Spencer, according to the tradition of the long series of
    thinkers whom he in this respect follows, speaks, in a well-known
    passage, of “symbolic” ideas as essentially inferior in the
    conscious definiteness of their truth to ideas whose relation to
    their objects we can directly picture, he applies a criterion to
    the testing of ideas which is as crude as if one should argue that
    a razor is not as good a tool as a hammer, because, forsooth, the
    test of a tool shall be its weight, or the amount of noise that
    you can make when you use it. Many admirable ideas are, indeed, of
    the type of mental pictures. That is not only obvious, but worth
    remembering. There is no reason why such images should not be both
    valid and important. Sensuous experience may show you many sorts
    of truth that we cannot at present otherwise express.

Further elaborations refer to his "fourth conception of being"
(referred to elsewhere). In it, he notes the fact that our own logic and
ideas cannot tell us what it is - but can tell us what is not. Ideas
about nonexistent beings are possible, while logic shows us they
cannot be true. Or as he states: "... our insight is always
_destructive of merely abstract possibilities_." Royce was actually
quite fond of formal logic, and other works showed he eagerly followed
the novel developments in set theory that were to lead to analytic
philosophy. Yet here, he claims math is limited, in that it shows us a
perfect world that can never hope to replace the need for
empericism. All it can do is cut off possibilities, showing that
certain things cannot exist in the world of being.

Likewise, we develop ideas through experience - external experience,
that is, our interaction with the real world. But this is no "pure
experience"; this is both intermediate and _selected_ - something we
actually attend to in exclusion to other things. Indeed, the
scientific method works by experiments in which we carefully control
things so that we are only looking at particular things we choose to
look at. The scientific method, notably, does not show us Truth, but
can only show us what fails.

The answer to all of this is the "common sense" one... just deal with
the facts. We have things that we _know_ from common sense, our senses
tell us things exist, provided we have them in working order. To which
Royce rejoinders:

    This theory, as usually stated, is simply full of inconsequences
    and inaccuracies that I cannot here undertake to follow
    out... Neither do our internal meanings ever present to us, nor
    yet do our external experiences ever produce before us, for our
    inspection, an object whose individuality we ever really know as
    such. Neither internal meanings nor external meanings, in their
    isolation, are in the least adequate to embody individuality.

You may claim to know something, but you cannot know any further than
you can describe, and that will inevitabley be limited. Restating his
prior point:

    ... external experience, in confirming ideas, furnishes a positive
    content which our human internal meanings never can construct for
    themselves, still the service of our external experience, in
    reavealing what is Real, has perfectly obvious limitations. It can
    confirm our hypotheses, but never adequately; for it shows us only
    particular instances that agree with such of our hypotheses as
    succeed.

This leads back to knowledge as of reality and being as very much like
his description of an ideal becoming a reality - a process much like a
mathematical limit where we can only approach knowledge by using
experience and logic to rule out possibilities, but never actually
achieve knowledge. "The Real, then, is, from this point of view,
that which is immediately beyond the whole of our series of possible
efforts to bring, by any process of finite experience and of merely
general conception, our own internal meaning to a complete
determination."


