---
title: Josiah Royce: Some Religious and Theological Writings
---

# Josiah Royce: Some Religious and Theological Writings

This post continues the survey of the writings of Josiah Royce
(1855-1916); the last post covered [some idealistic
works](royce-idealism); this will cover his more explicitly religous
works. The final post will be a slight departure, and cover applied
philosophy on some of the problems of his day.

One reason for my interest in Royce, besides the fact that he is
overlooked, is the fact that he is an idealist. Though I can't say I'm
completely in agreement with idealism (if forced to choose, I'm a bit
of a pragmatist), I think idealism is a good framework to look at
religious problems from. Unlike purely positivist frameworks that
relegate religion to a purely cultural or phenomelogical phenomenon,
an idealist has an actual metaphysical framework for reasoning about
religious thought. If some of it can be aligned with topics of concern
to Baha'is, so much the better.

So this will survey some of his religious works. It must be noted that
Josiah Royce was a product of Protestant America, and his writings
very much betray some of those themes. However, as a serious thinker,
he took the other great faiths of the world seriously and looked at
all the faiths for insight. This sets him apart from those you might
think of as theologians, who generally are sectarians first and
philosophers second. This also makes his work interesting to Baha'is -
indeed, to anyone with a universalist outlook on religions.

So, let's begin his survey of religious works with probably his most
famous argument.

## "The Possiblity of Error"

Royce is most famous as both an idealist and a theist. Perhaps his
most famous arguments are those in defense of theism, and of this, his
most inventive argument is what might refer to as the "argument from
error." That is, the argument that the existence of error in the
universe implies the existence of a ground truth that can only be
fulfilled by the existence of The Absolute (and hence, God) in the
universe. This article and the one that follow outline this argument
extensively. It originally appeared in _The Religious Aspect of
Philosophy_ (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1885) and covers an
argument that was central to his work as an Idealist. While this is
what you might think of as mid-career, it is near the beginning of his
serious philosophical work.

This article is by necessity rigorous; as Royce must first set out to
define error to us; e.g., "it must appear erroneous to every “right
mind” that is in possession of the facts. Hence the personal taste of
one man is not enough to define it." You must also prove that there is
error, as skeptics and relativists will claim there is no such thing,
and that it is all a matter of point of view. To do this, he argues as
follows:

    Logicians are agreed that single ideas, thoughts viewed apart from
    judgments, are neither true nor false. Only a judgment can be
    false. And if a reasoning process is said to be false, the real
    error lies still in an actual or suppressed assertion. A fallacy
    is a false assertion that a certain conclusion follows from
    certain premises. Error is therefore generally defined as a
    judgment that does not agree with its object. In the erroneous
    judgment, subject and predicate are so combined as, in the object,
    the corresponding elements are not combined. And thus the judgment
    comes to be false. Now, in this definition, nothing is doubtful or
    obscure save the one thing, namely, the assumed relation between
    the judgment and its object. 

Likewise, errors must be about something knowable; for example, "In spite of
the religious awe of some people in presence of the Unknowable, it is
safe to say, somewhat irreverently, that about a really Unknowable
nobody could make any sincere and self-consistent assertions that
could be errors. For self-consistent assertions about the Unknowable
would of necessity be meaningless." To break this down he classifies
certain sorts of errors that he claims one may make:

1. Errors about our neighbor’s states of mind. These are errors we
agree can be made, due to the fact that nobody ever communicates with
a person in and of themselves, but with their own conception of that
person. There is no "neutral" ground to decide whether or not a
conception is in error.

2. Errors about the natural world. This would seem straightforward,
but is complicated because such errors just refer to expectations of
future experience; e.g. what will happen at a future time? "When I
say, Thus and so will it be at such and such a future moment, I
postulate certain realities not now given to my consciousness." 

He then proposes his solution to difficulties with these two sorts of
errors:

    Either there is no such thing as error, which statement is a flat
    self-contradiction, or else there is an infinite unity of
    conscious thought to which is present all possible truth.

For instance, if you postulate some being as "fully realized intended
objects to the unity of an all-inclusive, absolutely clear, universal,
and conscious thought, of which all judgments, true or false, are but
fragments, the whole being at once Absolute Truth and Absolute
Knowledge," then and only then you can then postulate the existence of
error, since you have a source of ground truth for all errors.

This argument has become known as Royce's own contribution to
mankind's ever-growing proof of deity - the "proof from error."

There is one obvious objection to this argument - the commonsense argument
that an error is an error, duh, and the "Infinite all-knower" is just
a logical possiblity, an elaborately defined construct which hides a
tautology. Royce's answer is essentialy a restatement that proves this
existence by contradiction:

    ... let one try to affirm that the infinite content of the
    all-including mind does not exist, and that the foregoing idealism
    is a mere illusion of ours. He will find that he is involved in a
    circle from which there is no escape. For let him return to the
    position of total relativity and so say: “The infinite thought is
    unreal for me, and hence you are wrong.” But then also he admits
    that we are right, for in affirming this infinite we affirm,
    according to this doctrine of total relativity itself, something
    that is just as true as it seems to us to be true. The opposing
    argument is thus at each moment of its progress involved in a
    contradiction. Or again, let him insist that our doctrine is not
    only relatively, but really false. Then however he will fail to
    show us what this real falsity is. In fact he says what all our
    previous examination shows to mean, this, namely, that an infinite
    thought does exist, and does experience the truth, and compares
    our thought with the truth, and then observes this thought of ours
    to be false, that is, it discovers that itself is
    non-existent. Whoever likes this result may hold it if he can. 

In other words, without having sort of infinite truth as a ground truth,
there is no mechanism for affirming error. Something finite will not
do: "as we saw with this as a starting-point, there is no
stopping-place short of an Infinite Thought. The possibilities of
error are infinite. Infinite then must be the inclusive thought."

The logic seems airtight, but it is a bit like the various
improvements of Anselm's proof of the existence of God: you do it by
defining the existence of something so abstract, it cannot be directly
seen or experienced. Indeed, a broader version of this sort of thing
is what led Wittgenstein to declare that idealism was nothing but
"word games." Such proofs are a bit like the "proofs of existence" you
frequently find in mathematics - not nearly so satisfying as the
"proofs by construction" that show you how to find an object. After
all, proving there is a largest prime number is not nearly so
satisfying as actually producing it for someone.

Still, this is a good place to start, and will give you a good idea of
the idealism that serves as a foundation of his thought, as well as
the sort of thing that earned him later critics, even as he moved on
from these sorts of topics.

## "The Conception of God": Address by Professor Royce

In this unrelated address given some ten years later, Royce continues
to revisit his old work in an anthology on religious philosophy; this
continues by elaborating some features of the divine within his
framework. He starts by noting the exact problems that plague much
philosophical discussion of God - the same one I identified in the
prior writing: "When one conceives of God, one does so because one is
interested, not in the bare definition of a purely logical or
mathematical notion, but in the attempt to make out what sort of real
world this is in which you and I live." Obviously, Royce heard this
objection to his argument for years and was prepared to address it.

He posits that it is not enough to prove some God-thing and then back
out its characteristics from said proof; he rather wishes to prove
something that is defined:

    "I propose to define, in advance, what we mean under the name
    “God,” by means of using what tradition would call one of the
    Divine Attributes. I refer here to what has been called the
    attribute of Omniscience, or of the Divine Wisdom. By the word
    “God” I shall mean, then, in advance of any proof of God’s
    existence, a being who is conceived as possessing to the full all
    logically possible knowledge, insight, wisdom. Our problem, then,
    becomes at once this: Does there demonstrably exist an Omniscient
    Being?

So he starts with the proof of God as The omniscient being - something
that would see the totality of all existence as a whole. Facts would
not come to him in the disjointed recollections of a person, but fully
and completely organized. This being, to know all, would also need to be in
union with all experience. As such, he simply refers to this as The
Absolute. He then proves this being through a restatement of his
argument from error. At that point, he addresses some new points.

First, to explain the "proof from ignorance" (what he called is "proof
from error") it is necessary to truly elaborate on the
definition of ignorance. The first problem is that ignorance is
everywhere - a real knowledge is not the same as just experience
something:

    ... our experience changes with the current states of our own
    organizations, rather than reveals the reality beyond; and this
    reality beyond, as it is in itself, remains unknowable. So far,
    the well-known and popular argument for agnosticism as to every
    form of absolute truth.

In this form, ignorance is simply the ignorance of the philosophical
skeptic. But Royce is not content with this simple definition of
ignorance, but instead proposes a "higher ignorance". Anyone
reasonably educated is familiar with the above - that their senses can
lie to them, that their measurements can be inaccurate, that their
experimental apparatus may be complete. So many would believe that
they could be in possession of the total truth *if only those were not
the case*. But Royce is arguing that we are more ignorant than even
that: even were we to know all of the emperical facts with exact
accuracy, we would still be ignorant:

    You are ignorant, insofar as you desire a knowledge that you
    cannot now get. Now, the knowledge you desire is, from our present
    point of view, no longer any knowledge of a reality foreign to all
    possible experience; but it is an adequate knowledge of the
    contents and the objects of a certain conceived or ideal sort of
    experience, called by you organized experience. And an organized
    experience would be one that found a system of ideas fulfilled in
    and by its facts. This sort of knowledge, you, as human being, can
    only define indirectly, tentatively, slowly, fallibly. And you get
    at it thus imperfectly,—why? Because your immediate experience, as
    it comes, is always fleeting, fragmentary. This is the sort of
    direct knower that you are,—a being who can of himself verify only
    fragments. But you can conceive infinitely more than you can
    directly verify.

So let's assume that somehow you have access to the facts as they
truly are out there - and let's sidestep the fact that quantum physics
means complete knowledge is impossible, and presume that facts about
macroscopic objects are sufficent. You still need an "ideal organized
experience" to explain it all. This organized experience is one that
is accurate within a universal, nonlocal framework; many ideas are
accurate from particular points of view; i.e. many flat-earthers are
"accurate" insofar as from their own very limited point of view, they
find no inaccuracies. Taking a perhaps more realistic example, we now
know more about particle physcis than ever, and the number of
explanatory theories for it has exploded, partly because we have no
known experimental apparatuses to test the theries. So complete,
accurate sense knowledge, even were it possible, would be
insufficient.

Where does this fact fit into Royce's argument? By allowing Royce to
better flesh out his concept of the Absolute as the contrast, a total
organized experience:

    The question: Is there an absolutely organized experience? is
    equivalent to the question: Is there an absolute reality? You
    cannot first say: There is a reality now unknown to us mortals,
    and then go on to ask whether there is an experience to which such
    reality is presented. The terms “reality” and “organized
    experience” are correlative terms. The one can only be defined as
    the object, the content, of the other. Drop either, and the other
    vanishes.


So much for what the truth is. Ignorance is in degrees - one may know
the truth of certain things, yet not see the absolute as a singular
whole. So does this absolute truth exist? "... now, there can be no
such thing as a merely possible truth, definable apart from some
actual experience." If there is truth, than something must know this
truth. And if there is not truth - well, this claim cannot be
proven. Without truth, the claim that their is no truth is but a
provisional statement like the rest. 

Rather than stop there, Royce instead continues, presuming that he has
found a receptive audience. One may doubt this truth, but to accept it
means to accept a certain number of things:

    "People think it very modest to say: We cannot know what the
    Absolute Reality is. They forget that to make this assertion
    implies—unless one is using idle words without sense—that one
    knows what the term “Absolute Reality” means. People think it easy
    to say: We can be sure of only what our own finite experience
    presents. They forget that if a world of finite experience exists
    at all, this world must have a consistently definable
    constitution, in order that it may exist. Its constitution,
    however, turns out to be such that an Absolute Experience—namely,
    an experience acquainted with limitation only insofar as this
    limitation is determined by the organized and transparent
    constitution of this experience—is needed as that for which the
    fragmentary constitution of the finite world of experience
    exists. 

In other words, one it is simply misleading to think that there is a
God and claim we can know nothing about this God; rather, by design,
if there is truth, then God must at the same time be omniscient in
exactly these terms. To think otherwise would be tantamount to saying
there was something else besides God that was itself more omniscient,
a contradition in terms. Likewise, this is not the God of a simple
naive pantheism:

    It is not the conception of any Unconscious Reality, into which
    finite beings are absorbed; nor of a Universal Substance, in whose
    law our ethical independence is lost; nor of an Ineffable Mystery,
    which we can only silently adore. On the contrary, every ethical
    predicate that the highest religious faith of the past has
    attributed to God is capable of exact interpretation in terms of
    our present view.

In such means, Royce fleshes out further his concept of the Absolute.

## "Immortality"

The two lectures discussed above reprise whare are probably Rocye's
most well known argument, but in this author's opinions, these are
neither the most persuasive nor the most inventive. Some of his more
interesting work involves taking seriously certain concepts that have
been either taken on blind faith or hand-waved as "mysterious" by the
more grounded believers. This writing was taken from a lecture given
to an association of clergymen, where once again Royce was using
his idealistic philosophy to move beyond traditional assumptions of
religion. In this case, he takes up what it means to be of the eternal
world and how this reflects upon our own concept of immortality.

    In this genuinely real world of ideal values everything has
    eternal being in accordance with its absolute worth. A value
    cannot be lost, for it belongs to the timeless whole. But the
    ordinary point of view, which so emphasizes time, as most of us
    do, is merely a quantitative view—a falsification, or at least a
    narrowing, of the truth—a transformation of reality—a translation
    of its meaning into the abstract terms of a special set of
    concepts—concepts useful in our human science and in our daily
    business, but not valid for the student of real life.

In other words, the concept of a person being "immortal" as the same
being, extended forever but otherwise remaining of identical
personality, is a self-contradition. For mankind itself, time is an
essential component; strip him of that measure and things lose
meaning. It is easy to think of God as a concept being timeless, and
indeed is the only meaningful conception for Deity:

    To view the Deity as just now waiting, as we wait, for the
    vicissitudes of coming experience that are floating down the time
    stream toward him, to conceive the divine foreknowledge merely as
    a sort of clever computation of what will yet happen, a neat
    prediction of the fortunes that God has yet to expect—well, I
    cannot suppose any competent theologian to be satisfied thus to
    conceive of the divine knowledge of time, or of what time
    contains. If God is merely the potent computer and predicter,
    whose expectations as to the future have never yet been
    disappointed, then he remains merely upon the level of a mighty
    fortune teller and fortune controller—a magician after all. And
    not thus can you be content to conceive of the divine omniscience.

So we have eternety and timelessness, which is the domain of God, and
the domain of mankind, eternally time-bound. No matter what the scale
of man, the actions of man exist in time. What does it mean, then? To
Royce, this is where he revisits his theory of the Absolute, and the
single Will of the Absolute, and mankind's relationship with it:
    
    If we generalize our time experience, so as conceptually to view
    the whole world as expressing itself in a single temporal process,
    our generalization means this: that the entire world is the
    expression of a single will, which is in its totality continuous
    with our own, so that the past and future of our personal will are
    also the past and future of this world will, and conversely.

We, as part of the creation of The Absolute, are part of his will. If
some part of us is to be immortal, it is only as part of growing into
this will. Can Royce think of a reason why The Absolute needs us to
be a part of his creation extending forever into the future? He in
fact does hypothesize this need:

    The highest good logically demands a conquering of evil. The
    eternal needs expression in a temporal sequence whereof the
    eternal is the unity. The divine will must, as world will,
    differentiate itself into individuals, sequences, forms of
    finitude, into strivings, into ignorant seekings after the light,
    into doubting, erring, wandering beings, that even hereby the
    perfection of the spirit may be won. Perfect through
    suffering—this is the law of the divine perfection.

So there is a need in essence. However, this does not that we
ourselves will stay unchanged throughout time. There is no reason to
think of our personality, such as it is, as being static throughout?
In fact, it is not. If we are immortal, it is because we have an
immortality of moving beyond imperfections and error, until at the
limit of infinity we have merged into the universal will.


## "Monotheism"

Here is another theological article, this time for a religious
encyclopedia, that applies deep analysis to a concept most religious
believers take for granted. This argument was one of the most
illuminating to me, and is of particular interest to anyone of a
unitarian orientation, who has thought "if there is one God, how come
the religions can't agree on describing it?" In particular, Royce
concentrates on the monotheism of the great religions of both the
orient and the occident.

In the west, monotheism is usually simply contrasted against
polytheism. About this, Royce wants to consider two important problems
with this contrast:

1. Philosophically, the serious criticism to monothesism has never
come from polytheists. Instead, serious critiques have come from
several different viewpoints, none of which are polytheistic: 1)
"philosophic" panthesism; 2) atheism; and 3) agnosticism,
i.e. skeptical attitudes regarding "divine beings."

2. Defenders of monothesim must define which monotheism they are
defending; in particular, theere are several traditions of
monotheistic belief, and most religions incorporate one or more of
these traditions into their teachings.

Taking this critique in mind, most of the article is spent outlining
three traditions of monotheism, all of which have considerable
religious and philosophical tradition.

1. GOD AS LAW-GIVER. Or, as Royce puts it, "the ethical monotheism of
the Prophets of Israel."

2. GOD AS SOURCE OF CREATION. This is not the God of Genesis; rather
it is the God of Aristotle. As defined by the classical Greek
philosophers, this is the source of order or reasonableness of the
world. Royce refers to this as "Hellenistic" modernism.

3. GOD OF "RELIGIOUS PANTHEISM" AND MYSTICS. The essence of this is
those beliefs that insist not on the sole reality of God but upon the
"unreality of the world." This is the strongest strain of belief in
Hinduism, but also strongly motivated other mystic philopophies, such
as neoplatonism, and western philosophers like Spinoza or Meister
Eckhart.

Royce feels that Christianity draws from all three traditions. The
early Greek fathers of the church certainly drew from both the Israeli
and Hellenistic traditions, but over time the mystic tradition grew
equally as strong. Speaking as one reviewing Royce's work, I suspect
all of these traditions are present in all seriously considered modern
religions.

Another point brought out by Royce is the insufficience of any one of
these traditions. Philosophically, the intellectualism of the
Hellenistic view has perhaps dominated as the most defensible from
skeptics, but Royce insists this God of The Philosophers misses
something vital. Regarding theistic defenses:

    The more highly rational it has become, and the more its apparent
    barrenness, or its inability to combine the various motives which
    enter into the three different monotheistic tendencies has become
    manifest, the more the result of a careful analysis of the
    intellectual motives has led either to the revival of mysticism or
    to a skeptical indifference to philosophical theism. To say this
    is merely to report historical facts.

    Some negative results of the more purely Hellenic type of
    monotheism became especially manifest through the results of the
    Kantian criticism of reason and of its work. It is extremely
    interesting, however, to see what in Kant’s case, was the result
    of this criticism of the traditional arguments for the existence
    of God.

In closing, Royce repeats that defenders of theism must realize that
reliance on any one tradition is insufficient not only for defense,
but understanding. "To repeat, the philosophical problem of monotheism
is (1) In what sense is the world real? (2) In what sense is the world
a rational order? (3) In what sense is the world ethical? The effort
to answer these questions cannot be made by exclusive emphasis on one
of them."


**"The Fourth Conception of Being"**



**"The Rediscovery of the Inner Life: From Spinoza to Kant"**

This is one part of at least two lectures on the "inner life," in
which Royce takes up the history of philosophical though in this area
from mid-seventeenth century to the end of the eighteenth
century. Major philosophers discussed include Spinoza, Locke, Berkely
and Hume, but not Kant.

One particular focus here is the rise of skepticism. The
mid-seventeenth century brought the triumph of reason as an orienting
framework for philosophy. Such a world view pushed aside ideas of
inner life and human nature. But many philosophers, skeptics and
otherwise, pointed out serious limits:

* Locke, dispensed with ideals of "innate ideas." He contributed to
skepticism by noting the limits of our understanding coming from the
senses. Rather than innate ideas, he felt all human nature came from
experience, pointing the way for future empericists. "External
material things, as the objects of sensation, and the operations of
our own minds within" are the explanation for reason and our own inner
life.

* Berkely pointed out that these ideas of experience are themselves
intermediated by our senses - there is no such thing as a material
substance directly discoverable to us. Instead we have ideas - ideas
that Berkely thought were the language of God, but that other
philosophers answered differently in the coming years.

* Hume was brought forth as the eighteenth-century skeptical answer to
the seventeenth-century reasoners - we know nothing with certainty.

At this point, Royce stops before surveying Kant, but not before
emphasizing what the growth of skepticism meant for the philosophical
study of inner life:

    ... if the skepticism of the eighteenth
    century is to be gotten rid of, this will only be by transcending it,
    living through and beyond it, not by neglecting or by simply refuting
    it, from without.

This emphais points to later writings in phenomenology; e.g. Husserl.

**"The Concept of The Absolute and the Dialectical Method"**

This appears to have been from the same series of lectures, but
covering the period after Kant, with the birth of German idealism,
which as you might guess was of particular interest of Royce. The
point here was to outline some of the more problematic views of the
self particular to the idealists.

* points out that German idealism was a reflection of the tendencies
  and problems of German civilization of that age; e.g. the growth of
  romanticism, the emphasis on intellectual and spiritual life caused,
  perhaps by political weakness...

* Kant himself continued the skeptical movement through his most
  prominent writings, the Critiques - on Practical Reason, Pure
  Reason. The result was "negative"; e.g. not a system of ideals, but
  a critique of what was available. The transition away from Kant's
  philosophy to later idealism was a reflection on and a reaction to
  thre ideals in German life - individualism, respect for the
  intellectual life and a somewhat apolitical idealism.

This led to two tropes regarding the inner life - the self as the
heroic individual and sovereign of the new spiritual order, and the
self as the explorer and discoverer of Truth. This herioc
individualism is contrasted with the nihilistic, merciless
individualism of Nietchzsche. Royce himself seems far more positively
inclined toward these idealistic individualists, far more that some of
his contemporaries, quipping "our extreme individualists are fond of
making, as it were, pyramids of the skulls of their enemies." The
heroic individualists of idealism were idealists - and not just in
the philosophical sense.

However, carrying forward from this, the idealists then had their
problem - the absolute, however conceived, was of a conception
directed by the self itself. Man, far from being a product of The
Absolute, was a product of Nature. One way of addressing this was to
keep concepts of The Absolute impersonal, to prevent it being a
creature of man's limited reasoning. Another way was to revisit what
Royce thinks of as a "Hindu" mindset, in considering that The Divine
can best be known through knowledge of our true self. The upshot of
these attitudes, far from leading to a rigorous synthesis of these
tendencies, instead led idealsm to a very distinct tendency of
detached intellectualism and abstraction, parodied by their critics as
nothing but unintelligible phraseology.

Royce states that the answer to this problem was met by use of a very
old philosophical tool: the dialectic. The idea behind the dialectic,
known by many of you who have at least passing knowledge of Hegel, is
that knowledge advances from the synthesis of two opposing thesis that
seem to be in opposition. Or as Royce puts it:

   "...they developed a method which depends upon recognizing that the
   truth is a synthesis of antithetical moments or aspects, which does
   not ignore but unifies opposition."

The upshot is that truth, so defined, becomes a construction:

   "Nothing is true, for them, unless therein the sense, the purpose,
   the meaning of some active process is carried out, expressed,
   accomplished. Truth is not for these post-Kantian idealists
   something dead and settled apart from action. It is a construction,
   a process, an activity, a creation, an attainment." 

While Royce himself was no pragmatist, like pragmatists, he did not
understand truth as being as simple as static correspondence. Like
pragmatists, truth only existed where there was a "cash value" in our
ability to act on it. It is just that as an idealist, that cash value
was toward something rather more abstract. Later lectures would
further illuminate his view of truth, as something being both rigorous
and constructed.


**"Self-Consciousness, Social Consciousness and Nature"**

This wide-ranging paper covers a number of topics, mostly relating to
metaphysics and consciousness itself. In spite of the title, it is
hard to pick out an overarching theme. The goal, ostensibly is to
figure an explanation of how we can be creatures of nature, "the sport
of purely physical law," yet somehow be apart of it as the only
entities with an awareness of both nature and other conscious
creatures with this same awareness of nature and each other. Some of
this prefigures some recent objects of interest.

Here are some of the more interesting ideas:

- Metaphysically, man's social consciousness, that is, his awarenes of
  other sentient beings of mankind, is generally not thought of
  metaphysically significant, and is generally left to ethics. These
  ethicists, moreover, seem to view such relationships from a highly
  abstract view. Royce feels that the consciousness of others, and our
  own self-consciousness (our consciousness of other's awareness of
  us) is just as worthy of consideration, metaphysically. Indeed, the
  only class of objects outside of ourselves that we can verify
  without skepticism that truly exists are the existence of other
  beings.

- Evolution is not just differentiation of one type of animal to
  another. It is also a history of differentiation from one colony to
  the other, one society to another, and to new social orders.

- Our own consciousness, as such, is a product of being in a matrix of
  other beings. Our own self-consciousness, such as it is, is a
  product of our own differentiation of our own needs and our own
  perceptions from others. You cannot imagine the development of a
  distinct consciousness without some *other* with which to define it
  against. Otherwise, one would not be able to contrast the
  "experience as individuall mine" against experience as a whole, and
  would not be able to conceive of experiences just outside of ours.

- Against this, our awareness of nature takes a secondary
  importance. Nature itself is simply a mass of "possibilities of
  sensation." This again is given meaning by the experience of others,
  by which we are able to contrast private experiences and the
  experiences of others against the underlying nature of a
  thing-as-such. Indeed, the only way we can accurately confirm facts
  is by communicating with other beings that they do, in fact, agree
  with the same fact as we see them.

- Royce borrows some ideas from Pierce about consciousness, along with
  some of his own. Namely, that consciousness itself is about the will
  and decision, and habits, such as everyone falls prey to, are indeed
  signs of fainter consciousness within us. Under this framework, the
  consciousness of the animals exists but at a very much lower level,
  these animals themselves being dominated by habit. Indeed, under
  timelines of extremely long nature, even matter itself can be said
  to be dimly conscious, were you to grant that these "habits of
  nature" (e.g. physical laws) are themselves a sign of
  consciousnessness somehow, however dim. Why do we not communicate
  with these? Because we do not live at the same scale.

**"The Religious Problems and the Theory of Being"**
**"The Internal and External Meaning of Ideas"**

These two papers from Rocye's middle period discuss some of his ideas
on _ideas_. In particular, as an idealist, he views ideas as
particularly significant; to a true idealist, our philosophical world
is made up of ideas of this sort much the same way that atoms make up
the world for materialists.

To start with, Royce views the study of these ideas as the basis for
philosophical reason. The material world, on the other hand, is the
world of brute facts; things just _are_; it is the scientific theories
about our world that is noble, and these scientific theories persist
in turning up baffling irregularities in the world of fact. He regards
both mysticism and neoplatonism as philosophies that attempted to over
come such irregularities through simple disregard of the world of
fact.

Ideas, such as the scientific theories, are something that can be
known, and it is important that these ideas relate to reality. But the
idea exists in a reality not in the world of fact; instead, it is only in the
consciousness of a person; and it is significant only in that the idea
embodies an _act of will_. Royce is emphatic on this point - it is
simply not possible separate an idea from the act of will that could
potentially embody it. Whether this act of will is carried out - or
even possible to carry out - is of no import. That will is how the
world of idea is carried out into reality. The actions of people and
less sentient creatures all carry out ideas that create this
reality. (Other writings elaborate that less sentient beings are also
carrying out ideas, albeit ones that are instinctual or force of
habit; indeed, material objects themselves carry out "ideas" in the
laws of nature.)

    Whatever else our ideas are, and however much or little they may
    be, at any moment, expressed in rich, sensuous imagery, it is
    certain that they are ideas not because they are masses or series
    of images, but because they embody present conscious
    purposes. Every idea is as much a volitional process as it is an
    intellectual process.

Being then becomes our existence as we carry out ideas:

    To be means simply to express, to embody the complete internal
    meaning of a certain absolute system of ideas,—a system, moreover,
    which is genuinely implied in the true internal meaning or purpose
    of every finite idea, however fragmentary.

And The Meaning (in the philosophical sense) is founded in the Will
and Purpose that caries out these ideas. This underlies his theory of
immortality of beings outlined elsewhere: a being is a bit like an
irrational number that goes on forever, and the process of being is
the will to embody an idea that, much like an irrational number, will
approach its limit only at infinity.

It is important to note that even physical processes are themselves
ideas coming into being. Royce is notable in that he treats the
abstract ideas as being just as worth of consideration,
metaphysically, as the concrete ideas in reality. He contrasts this
attidue toward a prior materialist conception:

    When Mr. Spencer, according to the tradition of the long series of
    thinkers whom he in this respect follows, speaks, in a well-known
    passage, of “symbolic” ideas as essentially inferior in the
    conscious definiteness of their truth to ideas whose relation to
    their objects we can directly picture, he applies a criterion to
    the testing of ideas which is as crude as if one should argue that
    a razor is not as good a tool as a hammer, because, forsooth, the
    test of a tool shall be its weight, or the amount of noise that
    you can make when you use it. Many admirable ideas are, indeed, of
    the type of mental pictures. That is not only obvious, but worth
    remembering. There is no reason why such images should not be both
    valid and important. Sensuous experience may show you many sorts
    of truth that we cannot at present otherwise express.

Further elaborations refer to his "fourth conception of being"
(referred to elsewhere). In it, he notes the fact that our own logic and
ideas cannot tell us what it is - but can tell us what is not. Ideas
about nonexistent beings are possible, while logic shows us they
cannot be true. Or as he states: "... our insight is always
_destructive of merely abstract possibilities_." Royce was actually
quite fond of formal logic, and other works showed he eagerly followed
the novel developments in set theory that were to lead to analytic
philosophy. Yet here, he claims math is limited, in that it shows us a
perfect world that can never hope to replace the need for
empericism. All it can do is cut off possibilities, showing that
certain things cannot exist in the world of being.

Likewise, we develop ideas through experience - external experience,
that is, our interaction with the real world. But this is no "pure
experience"; this is both intermediate and _selected_ - something we
actually attend to in exclusion to other things. Indeed, the
scientific method works by experiments in which we carefully control
things so that we are only looking at particular things we choose to
look at. The scientific method, notably, does not show us Truth, but
can only show us what fails.

The answer to all of this is the "common sense" one... just deal with
the facts. We have things that we _know_ from common sense, our senses
tell us things exist, provided we have them in working order. To which
Royce rejoinders:

    This theory, as usually stated, is simply full of inconsequences
    and inaccuracies that I cannot here undertake to follow
    out... Neither do our internal meanings ever present to us, nor
    yet do our external experiences ever produce before us, for our
    inspection, an object whose individuality we ever really know as
    such. Neither internal meanings nor external meanings, in their
    isolation, are in the least adequate to embody individuality.

You may claim to know something, but you cannot know any further than
you can describe, and that will inevitabley be limited. Restating his
prior point:

    ... external experience, in confirming ideas, furnishes a positive
    content which our human internal meanings never can construct for
    themselves, still the service of our external experience, in
    reavealing what is Real, has perfectly obvious limitations. It can
    confirm our hypotheses, but never adequately; for it shows us only
    particular instances that agree with such of our hypotheses as
    succeed.

This leads back to knowledge as of reality and being as very much like
his description of an ideal becoming a reality - a process much like a
mathematical limit where we can only approach knowledge by using
experience and logic to rule out possibilities, but never actually
achieve knowledge. "The Real, then, is, from this point of view,
that which is immediately beyond the whole of our series of possible
efforts to bring, by any process of finite experience and of merely
general conception, our own internal meaning to a complete
determination."


