---
title: Josiah Royce: Social Commentary and Applied Philosophy
---

# Josiah Royce: Social Commentary and Applied Philosophy

We wrap up this survey of critical writings by Josiah Royce by
covering some of his social commentary. This is some of his most
rewarding, even if not strictly philosophy.

This is the last post I intend to do on Royce's writings, but before
closing, I wanted to offer an explanation for some omissions of this
survey. As far as the quality of contribution, Royce's strongest work
is probably in his writings on logic, of all things. Royce, far from
being concerned only with his idealistic preoccupations, concerned
himself with serious thought of all schools. He is professor
responsible for retrieving and arranging for storage of C. S. Pierce's
papers when he died, in the process rescuing the work of someone
called "The American Aristotle" from an undeserved oblivion. His logic
writings anticipate the importance of the new fields of set theory,
and Royce seems to eagerly greet the foundations of what was to become
the analytic school. His writings on the scientific methods are of
interest as well; he wrote the introduction for the great Henri
Poincare's work _Science and Hypothesis_. Unfortunately, these fields
have all been so thorougly explored and exploited by twentieth century
philosophers that Royce's work is now dated by comparison. In a survey
of Royce's writings, it is necessary to cover what is the most benefit
to us in the here and now, not what may have been the most innovative
at the time of its writing.

So I'd like to close by surveying some of his miscellaneous works on
ethics and issues in society. One thing that drove the
English-speaking idealists was an attempt to create a philosophy
divoriced from the atomistic, individualistic thought that
characterized the positivist philosophy of the nineteenth
century. Royce's social commentary is very much in that vein, and it
is in the spirit of someone who held such near-contemporaries like
Nietzche at a distance. Not all of his commentary remains valid; his
article "Race Questions and Prejudices" from _Race Questions,
Provincialism, and Other American Problems_ is a stunning display of
the "Overton Window" in action, as Royce felt constrained from
proffering even weakly egalatarian ideas due to the "science" of the
day (note the irony quotes), which was profoundly racist in
viewpoint. As such, Royce could only suspect aloud what we now know as
a fact: the science of race of the early twentieth century was
remarkably flawed and driven entirely by the prejudices of the
day. But some of the writings remain vital, and it is those I wish to
summarize.

So coming full-circle, this is a philosopher who, whether because of
his viewpoint or coincidentally, has chosen to address the "divine
virtues" of society in a useful way.

## _The Philosophy of Loyalty_

Josiah Royce held Loyalty to be an especially prized virtue. In the
book _The Philosophy of Loyalty_, a work he felt was his most central
statement on ethics, he outlined why it was that he felt this
way. This book was printed in its entirety in _The Basic Writings of
Josiah Royce_ Volume II.

For someone to understand why he so prized it, it is necessary to
accept his definition on what loyalty meant to him:

    Loyalty shall mean, according to this preliminary definition: The
    willing and practical and thoroughgoing devotion of a person to a
    cause. A man is loyal when, first, he has some cause to which he
    is loyal; when, secondly, he willingly and thoroughly devotes
    himself to this cause; and when, thirdly, he expresses his
    devotion in some sustained and practical way, by acting steadily
    in the service of his cause.

Indeed, Royce claims:

    In loyalty, when loyalty is properly defined, is the fulfillment
    of the whole moral law.

He then goes on to describe why he believes this, but he also spends a
fair bit of time circumscribing this definition. The reason he does so
is obvious: in order for loyalty to be moral, it must attach itself to
a worth cause. This makes the discussion anything but
straightforward, and his conception of loyalty is broader than what
one typically thinks of when they think of typical attachments to
home, country, and football teams.

The most common reason for people to criticize loyalty is
individualism. Individualistic critics can easily point to instances
where loyal people have done bad deeds working loyally for causes of
evil intent. Royce is at pains to acknowledge this fact, since it is
obviously the main critique of his thesis:

    And I beg you not to object to me, at this point, that such
    devoted people have often been loyal to very bad causes; or that
    different people have been loyal to causes which were in deadly
    war with one another, so that loyal people must often have been
    falsely guided. I beg you, above all, not to interpose here the
    objection that our modern doubters concerning moral problems
    simply cannot at present see to what one cause they ought to be
    loyal, so that just herein, just in our inability to see a fitting
    and central object of loyalty, lies the root of our modern moral
    confusion and distraction. All those possible objections are
    indeed perfectly fair considerations.

But the solution is never mere individualism, or following
one's own muse:

    ... I can never find out what my own will is by merely brooding
    over my natural desires, or by following my momentary caprices.

One reason for the importance of loyalty is that it is involved in
action. It is never a mere sentiment:

    He does something. This something serves his cause. Loyalty is
    never mere emotion. Adoration and affection may go with loyalty,
    but can never alone constitute loyalty. Furthermore, the devotion
    of the loyal man involves a sort of restraint or submission of his
    natural desires to his cause. Loyalty without self-control is
    impossible. The loyal man serves. That is, he does not merely
    follow his own impulses.

Royce's view of loyalty - or rather his distrust of unalloyed
individualism - seems to rest on the fact that individual actions are
always set within community in any case:

    By nature, then, apart from a specific training, I have no
    personal will of my own. One of the principal tasks of my life is
    to learn to have a will of my own. To learn your own will,—yes, to
    create your own will, is one of the largest of your human
    undertakings. Here, then, is the paradox. I, and only I, whenever
    I come to my own, can morally justify to myself my own plan of
    life. No outer authority can ever give me the true reason for my
    duty. Yet I, left to myself, can never find a plan of life. I have
    no inborn ideal naturally present within myself. By nature I
    simply go on crying out in a sort of chaotic self-will, according
    as the momentary play of desire determines.

The question Royce poses is therefore, how Man is to best develop
himself ethically. It is within community. Elsewhere, in "Individual
Experience and Social Experience as Sources of Religious Insight," he
opines that this is best done within the context of religious
communities, in particular his own form of Protestantism. But he views
loyalty within the group as the key concept that makes moral
development possible.

While he is no lover of the "lower forms" of loyalty, the sort of
perversion of human nature that glorifies the war spirit and tribal
clashes, he views loyalty as fulfilling an innately noble need:

    At its best the war-spirit is no very clear or rational state of
    anybody’s mind. But one reason why men may love this spirit is
    that when it comes, it seems at once to define a plan of life,—a
    plan which solves the conflicts of self-will and conformity. This
    plan has two features: (1) it is through and through a social
    plan, obedient to the general will of one’s country, submissive;
    (2) it is through and through an exaltation of the self, of the
    inner man, who now feels glorified through his sacrifice,
    dignified in his self-surrender, glad to be his country’s servant
    and martyr,—yet sure that through this very readiness for
    self-destruction he wins the rank of hero. Well, if the man whose
    case we are supposing gets possessed by some such passion as this,
    he wins for the moment the consciousness of what I call “loyalty.”
    This loyalty no longer knows anything about the old circular
    conflicts of self-will and of conformity. The self, at such
    moments, looks indeed outward for its plan of life.

In other words, to be a better person, one must live for something
other than oneself, and to live for others, one must be loyal. Note
that loyalty in many cases requires obedience: "this plan [of loyalty]
would also be a plan of obedience, because it would mean living for
the cause." Royce therefore wishes to rehabilitate the concept of
obedience, another virtue commonly disregarded by individualists.

One of the ironies of loyalty is that many people are opposed in it in
the abstract. Yet they are quite loyal to certain things in their
opposition to loyalty. Recounting a discussion he had with a friend:

    “Loyalty,” so he in effect said, “has been in the past one of
    humanity’s most disastrous failings and weaknesses. Tyrants have
    used the spirit of loyalty as their principal tool. I am glad,” he
    went on, “that we are outgrowing loyalty, whatever its forms or
    whatever the causes that it serves. What we want in the future is
    the training of individual judgment. We want enlightenment and
    independence. Let us have done with loyalty.”

    I need hardly remark that my opponent’s earnestness, his passion
    for the universal triumph of individual freedom, his plainness of
    speech, his hatred of oppression, were themselves symptoms of a
    very loyal spirit. For he had his cause. That was plain. It was a
    social cause — the one need of the many for release from the
    oppressor. He spoke like a man who was devoted to that cause.

As Royce sees it, not only is loyalty important, but it seems that
people are inclined to it no matter what they may claim. So better to
understand it and use it properly. "Now, loyalty, thus defined, is, as
we have maintained, something which we all, as human beings, need."

Royce's idealism has a slight anti-individualistic streak, so it is
not surprising he would wish to rehabilitate communitarian virtues
like loyalty. He wishes that all individualists would consider the
flip side of individualism: "The selfish we had always with us. But
the divine right to be selfish was never more ingeniously defended, in
the name of the loftiest spiritual dignity, than it is sometimes
defended and illustrated today." But Royce is not quick to diminish
the concerns of individualists. His solution lies in defining what
proper loyalties are, since we are unable to dispense with these.

His solution, is the concept of "Loyalty to Loyalty." In other words,
we can choose causes to be loyal, so long as those causes are loyal to
the concept of loyalty in itself. What is a cause that is disloyal to
loyalty? It is a cause that seeks to thwart the loyalties that other
people themselves rightly claim. So, for instance, they would sweep
aside the loyalties that bind together hateful groups of individuals,
groups bound together in a warlike spirit and secret cabals bent on
compromising other people's plans. You may be a member of the loyal
opposition of course - with the emphasis on the loyal part. After all,
what good is cheering on a football team if there are no other fans
cheering for the other side?

    A cause, we said, is a possible object of loyalty only in case it
    is such as to join many persons into the unity of a single life.

In general loyalties based on opposition are entirely negative, the
worst sort being found in the spirit of war:

    If loyalty is a supreme good, the mutually destructive conflict of
    loyalties is in general a supreme evil. If loyalty is a good for
    all sorts and conditions of men, the war of man against man has
    been especially mischievous, not so much because it has hurt,
    maimed, impoverished, or slain men, as because it has so often
    robbed the defeated of their causes, of their opportunities to be
    loyal, and sometimes of their very spirit of loyalty.

Such a loyalty requires a loyalty to all of mankind:

    But now suppose that my cause, like the family in a feud, or like
    the pirate ship, or like the aggressively warlike nation, lives by
    the destruction of the loyalty of other families, or of its own
    community, or of other communities. Then, indeed, I get a good for
    myself and for my fellow servants by our common loyalty; but I war
    against this very spirit of loyalty as it appears in our
    opponent’s loyalty to his own cause.

And likewise, this loyalty becomes a great equalizer of all men in
unity for great causes:

    ... we must steadfastly bear in mind that, when we declared
    loyalty to be a supreme good for the loyal man himself, we were
    not speaking of a good that can come to a few men only—to heroes
    or to saints of an especially exalted mental type. As we expressly
    said, the mightiest and the humblest members of any social order
    can be morally equal in the exemplification of loyalty.

He then describes many virtues and ethical precepts as coming out of
this "loyalty to loyalty." For instance, honesty:

    Honesty, then, is owed not merely and not even mainly to those
    with whom we directly deal when we do honest acts; it is owed to
    mankind at large, and it benefits the community and the general
    cause of commercial loyalty.

and justice:

    Justice means, in general, fidelity to human ties insofar as they
    are ties. Justice thus concerns itself with what may be called the
    “mere forms in which loyalty expresses itself.” Justice,
    therefore, is simply one aspect of loyalty—the more formal and
    abstract side of loyal life.

And he continues:

    Benevolence, on the other hand, is that aspect of loyalty which
    directly concerns itself with your influence upon the inner life
    of human beings who enjoy, who suffer, and whose private good is
    to be affected by your deeds. Since no personal good that your
    fellow can possess is superior to his own loyalty, your own
    loyalty to loyalty is itself a supremely benevolent type of
    activity.

And,

    Courtesy, then, may be defined as an explicit assumption of a
    loyal bearing.

Readers who are familiar with the Baha'i Faith probably have a sense
of deja vu - this "loyalty to loyalty" sure looks like the way Baha'is
talk about Unity as a unifying ethical theme! Personally, it seems
like a more accurate designation. However, we should not be surprised
that Josiah Royce phrases it thus, given that his purpose is to
rehabilitate loyalty as a virtue and reign in selfish
individualism. Indeed, Baha'is do talk of loyalty, but in the context
of "wider loyalty."

This "loyalty to loyalty" seems a awkward formulation of what is
essentially "unity," but the advice he gives is just as valid, given
that he is talking about the same thing.

Of course, he is not quite talking about the same thing - in that part
of this loyalty to loyalty is an attempt to elevate loyalty itself, no
matter what the cause. This is indeed something that Baha'is do not
emphasize so much. Royce is clear that this "loyalty to loyalty"
respects loyalty in whatever forms; Baha'is are clear that loyalties
are to be respected, but only insofar as any given loyalty is
subservient to greater loyalties to mankind as a whole. Royce states
that this loyalty to loyalty indicates "my right to judge the choices
of my fellow is thus very sharply limited"; Baha'is would say you have
no right to judge, but for entirely different reason of humility. This
difference of emphasis is clear, and it is again visible in his
writings on provincialism as a useful ethic.

Later in his writing, though, he hits on one observation that is
particularly useful in this day and age:

    ... loyalty is not sufficiently prominent amongst our explicit
    social ideals in America. It is too much left to the true-hearted
    obscure people.

This very much gets to the problem Jonathan Haidt posed his book _The
Righteous Mind_. The upraising of loyalty, as an issue, seems to be
one that divides the nation culturally. Unfortunately, as is seen by
the distinction between Royce's formulation of "loyalty to loyalty"
and the Baha'i formulation of unity, in many cases this is a
distinction without a difference from an ethical point of
view. However, it is always necessary to reach people in the language
that they use, and if "true-hearted obscure people" think with
language in those terms, that is the language to reach them with.

Another important point is his view of loyalty as an essential human
need. One problem is that loyalty itself is so easily corrupted:

    Narrow loyalties, side by side with irrational forms of
    individualism and with a cynical contempt for all loyalty,—these
    are what we too often see in the life of our country. For where
    the special loyalties are, amongst our people, most developed,
    they far too often take the form of a loyalty to mutually hostile
    partisan organizations, or to sects, or to social classes, at the
    expense of loyalty to the community or to the whole country.

The answer is, of course, the concept of this "loyalty to loyalty":

    Loyalty in itself is never an evil. The arbitrary interference
    with other men’s loyalties, the disloyalty to the universal cause
    of loyalty, is what does the mischief here in question.

Royce thinks of loyalty as being a unique imperative in America, a
nation whose temperment and history had made so uniquely
individualistic. This is particularly so of governmental affairs, due
to people's estrangement from the civic life of community and nation:

    ... the power of the state, even when it is attractive to the
    individual, still seems to him like a great nature force, rather
    than like his own loyal self, writ large.

This estrangement is due to a lack of a proper loyalty:

    We have that corrupt political life which partisan mismanagement
    exemplifies. And we have that total indifference to all forms of
    loyalty which our seekers after individual power sometimes
    exhibit, and which occasionally appears as so serious an evil in
    the conduct of the business of certain great corporations. All
    these, I insist, are in our present American life symptoms of the
    state of the self-estranged spirit... Instead of developing into
    the true loyalty to loyalty, it fails to recognize its own in the
    vast world of national affairs. It is dazzled by the show of
    power. It limits its devotion to the service of the political
    party, or of the labor union, or of some other sectarian social
    organization.

Royce them embarks on a chapter in which he discusses at length how to
cultivate a proper loyalty, and this "loyalty to loyalty." As in the
rest of the book he is discussing a very specific, idealized version
of loyalty: "Loyalty so far means for us, in these lectures, the
willing, the thoroughgoing, and the practical devotion of a self to a
cause." For those not inclined to view everything through Royce's lens
of loyalty, this is really cultivation of self-sacrifice and service
to others through service to a cause. Royce defends this use of
loyalty as such: "Granting, however, my own definition of my term, I
cannot easily use any other popular or philosophical term in the same
way. I cannot substitute the word “devotion” for the term “loyalty,”
since loyalty is to my mind a very special kind of devotion. A man
might be devoted to the pursuit of pleasure; but that would not make
him loyal."

Some of his recommendations for training to loyalty seem questionable
and counterproductive. I can pick out a few: "If we are to be made
loyal, we want personal leaders, and highly idealized causes." "The
parent or teacher who trifles with the code of honor of children by
encouraging the talebearer, or by even requiring that a child should
become an informer, is simply encouraging disloyalty. He outrages the
embryonic conscience of his young charges." "... causes have been
idealized not only by the personal influence of the leaders, but also
by certain deeply pathetic motives to which the leaders could
constantly appeal. I refer to the process illustrated by the history
of lost causes." "Whatever our cause, we need personal leaders."



## "Provincialism"

Royce also thought provincialism, like loyalty had a bad rap. And in
similar writings, he sought to reinvent a positive provincialism, much
like he sought to reinvent loyalty. In doing so, he managed to
recommend something he called provincialism, but is probably not as
such.

Royce recognizes the dangers posed by provincialism. At the time of
writing, the civil war was a recent memory, fought within his
lifetime. Even before then, the US struggled to educate its citizens
to regard themselves as citizens of a nation, rather than of their
state or locality. But his contention at the time of this writing (1908)
is that nationalism posed a greater problem. "... the modern world has
reached a point where it needs, more than ever before, the vigorous
development of a highly organized provincial life."

The reason he believes such is because he felt there were a number of
problems in US culture that could be fixed by a renewed emphasis on
local community life:

_Lack of "rootedness."_ The US of the time of his writing was one in
which it was quite common to move across the nation to seek one's
fortune. This was at a time flying home to visit was not an option!
Moving away, if only to another state, might mean a trip of a few days
by train. Such movement meant many citizens with no personal stake in
the health of their newfound communities, coupled with the abandonment
of otherwise vibrant communities by those citizens.

_Lack of multiple perspectives._ Or as stated by Royce, "because of
the spread of popular education, and because of the consolidation and
of the centralization of industries and of social authorities, we tend
all over the nation, and, in some degree, even throughout the
civilized world, to read the same daily news, to share the same
general ideas, to submit to the same overmastering social forces, to
live in the same external fashions, to discourage individuality, and
to approach a dead level of harassed mediocrity." This is condition
that would easily be recognized by any modern reader! Royce appeals to
provincialism as mitigating the uniformity that tended to be imposed
by certain voices. "There may be a limit to the number of people who
ought to imitate precisely the same body of ideas and customs. For
imitation is not man’s whole business."

_Mob Mentality._ "At such times of emotional disturbance, society is
subject to tendencies which have recently received a good deal of
psychological study. They are the tendencies to constitute what has
often been called the “spirit of the crowd” or of “the mob.”" Royce
appeals to provincialism as a bulwark agains tthe spirit of the
mob. Why? Because it serves as a counterwieght against "popular
enthusiasms." And such a counterweight is a necessity in any
democracy: "It follows that if we are to look for the source of the
greatest dangers of popular government, we must expect to find them in
the influence of the mob spirit." Royce asserts that the best
counterweight against the mob spirit is in provincialism, which takes
a great emphasis on local pride and flourishing of individual
communities, and "the willingness to remember one’s own ways and
ideals, even at the moment when the nation is carried away by some
leveling emotion."

Royce proposes provincialism as an antidote to these evils, but a very
particular sort of provincialism:

    But the better aspect of our provincial consciousness is always
    its longing for the improvement of the community. And now, in the
    second place, a wise provincialism remembers that it is one thing
    to seek to make ideal values in some unique sense our own, and it
    is quite another thing to believe that if they are our own, other
    people cannot possess such ideal values in their own equally
    unique fashion.

In essense, Royce looks to a provincial love of community and
individuality as necessary for the life of the nation.

## "On Certain Limitations of the Thoughtful Public"

This is an interesting bit of social commentary by Royce. What he
attempts to do is outline some of the problems with the America
public; notably, what he sees as a penchant for ill-thought out
enthusiasms. This is a common refrain among the lettered classes, but
usually aimed at the less educated. Royce's contribution is to note
tat isn't necessarily the problem:

    It is not the ignorant amongst us who are the prey of strange new
    doctrines, so much as a portion of the most considerate classes of
    our public. And we are indeed not obliged to be bigoted in order
    to feel that, at present, this spiritual plasticity of our
    American public has gone too far.

In other words, this is perhaps the problem of those who are perhaps
more educated on average. After all, the least educated is too
incurious to take part in such fads.

What is the problem? Not, surely, the problem that people are
curious. The problem is the well-meaning public does not have the
focus necessary to resolve problems together, as intended by the
founders of the American republic. Indeed, both the instrument of
governance and the public frequently find themselves unable to thwart
evil:

    Whenever the servants of ill perfect their devices for corrupting
    anywhere the state, and misusing its resources, the lovers of good
    things find themselves too frequently helpless to thwart such
    mischief. Yet amongst us the conscious servants of ill are really
    in a very decided minority.

The problem is the nature of the thoughtful public make reform efforts
fail time and time again:

    Would-be reformers become numerous. But alas, they war among
    themselves. They are too often crude, strident, prejudiced... Many
    listen and applaud. Yet at the elections the prophets do not
    win. The thoughtful public remains the most characteristic, but
    too often the least effective, portion of the community... The
    great limitation of our thoughtful public in America remains its
    inability to take sufficient control of affairs.

The problm is a number of tendencies of "the thoughtful public";
whether these are due to the nature of the American educated classes
or simple human nature Royce does not attempt to say. But he does have
a number of recommendations.

One is too much time spent in overthought and argumentation. "Thought
must indeed be free. But freedom means responsibility. Thought in any
individual, must freely set limits to its own finite task. And when
the thoughtful lovers of ideals forget this fact, they may become mere
wranglers, or doctrinaires, or pedants..." Relatedly, they frequently
spend too much time trying to convince simply through argumentation:
"students, many reformers, many teachers, are too much disposed to
trust to constant argument, reasoning, or reflection, to keep them
faithful to their own ideals, and to win others to these ideals." The
goal is to win people to one's cause: not to be right, or set the
terms for agreement: "this fault of a too abstract thoughtfulness is
committed, in substance, whenever people try to reform all the world,
or even any great region of our complex lives, by insisting upon any
one set of phrases, of human conceptions and words, which the
individual himself has found somehow dear to his own
consciousness... They mistake the power to define for the power to
accomplish."

Related to this is to think too big. Royce claims we would be much
better off if everyone tried to patiently, knowledgeably work their
own corner of the world in reform. This may mean giving up one's
conceit of being an expert on everything: "... remember, life is vast,
and your little clearing is very small. In the rest of life, cultivate
näiveté, accept authority, dread fads, follow as faithfully as your
instinct permits other lovers of the ideal who are here wiser than
you, and be sure that though your head splits you will never think out
all your problems, or formulate all your ideals so long as you are in
this life. If this precept were followed in this country there would
be more experts, and fewer popular crazes, more effective work done,
and less time wasted in hopeless efforts at general reforms."

As for the members of the thoughtful public and their spiritual
quests, Royce recomments the middle path of moderation: "As for the
world of faith, it is as vain to be a mere seeker of novelties as it
is to be a mere conservative. In our deeper faiths the newest and the
oldest of humanity’s deeds, interests, and experiences lie side by
side. What is new for one soul is not new for another."

Above all, Royce wants his followers to organize and be pragmatic - to
do good rather than be right. "Organize through a willingness to
recognize that we must often differ in insight, but that what we need
is to do something together. Avoid this restless longing for mere
novelty. Learn to wait, to believe in more than you see, and to love
not what is old or new, but what is eternal."
