---
title: The Deontological Trap
---

I was amused by [this article I stumbled upon the other day]( ) that
posed that utilitarians were thought of as more moral than
deontoligists but thought of as less desireable by potential
mates. This amused me for two reasons; 1) it confirms what I already
sorta suspected and 2) it seems unmistakeable that a picture of
Chiidi and Eleanor from _The Good Place_ has become the go-to clipart
for any pointy-headed article discussing ethics.

But first - if you don't know what utilitarianism and deontologicalism
is, you're in for a ~~bore~~ treat! I'll set forth more or less what
they are - I'll be general to avoid saying something people can
obviously disagree:

    Utilitilitarian - _you should do what creates the most good for
    society as a whole_.

    Deontologist - _you should do what is your duty_.

Obviously these are more descriptions of mindsets than anything else -
one could be a very lax utilitarian and a strict deontologist, or vice
versa. But the main reason the shift of emphasis that is somewhat
placed on things. The usual distinction, and one this particular
article brings up explicitly, is you may have certain duties that may
override what might be an obvious good. So, for instance, as a good
husband, it is my duty to ensure my wife and children are well fed, a
duty that overrides my duty to feed some homeless guy on the street.

In practice, utilitarians and deontologists wind up coming to the same
conclusions, albeit from a different direction. So, for instance,
supposing I decided to leave my wife and run away with Jameela Jamil
(the attractive Indian actress on "The Good Place"). Both
deontologists and utilitarians would condemn this, but the
deontologists would condemn this as a dereliction to my duty as a
husband to be faithful to my wife. Utilitaries would condemn this as a
negative, as I would increase my happiness, but greatly decrease the
happiness of my wife, my children, and Jameela Jamil.

It is said that perhaps at least in popular parlance, utilitarianism
may be the most popular ethics. It's well-understood and intuitive;
it's easily explained in economic terms, which seems to be _all_
everyone frames discussions around nowadays, and it even comes up in
Spock's Vulcan credo "The good of the many outweigh the good of the
few."

However, in our ordinary life, most of us are deontologists. We have
certain relationships and committments that cause us to place our
loved ones well above and beyond any concern we have for our fellow
man. From a utilitarian framework, this is technically not
allowed. Now, there is something called "law utilitarianism" that
works around this; that is, we act should act according to laws which,
if obeyed, would maximize the good of everyone. So according to this,
if we believed that everyone would be better off preferring their
immediate family under certain cases, and that law in a whole was
better for society - by, for example, allowing all husbands to assure
their wives that, should some real-life ethical dilemmas came up in
real life, you would always save her without question, and someone
else would have to save a half dozen kids from the burning bus she
hit.

The fact that someone had to invent "law utilitarianism" points to a
difficulty with utilitarianism. If taken at face value and acted on,
it is impractical. It would require everyone to sacrifice at a level
more than they are comfortable with. It forces everyone to choose
between their own happiness, the happiness of their loved ones, and
those of strangers who nevertheless also deserve happiness. It is seen
as the province of monks and saints, not normal people we hope to
interact with. So it is no surprise that while people admire such
thought, they themselves have limited desire to get in a relationship
with such a person. Your desires would have to conform to some real
extent with that person already.

What am I? I don't know what I am (hopefully not an astard-bay, but we
all think more highly of ourselves than others do). But what I aim to
be is a virtues moralist, which is yet a third category:

    _Virtues Morals_ - you should cultivate the habits necessary to be
    the sort of person who instinctively carries out moral acts.

[I've explained why I tend toward this before](virtues), but to recap,
it's because I think most of us perform moral acts the way we perform
all other acts - more or less automatically, and if you don't train
yourself do this you will undermine whatever moral philosophy we claim
to have.

So in ("the trolly problem"), in which you have to decide whether to
flip a switch to save five people from certain death or leave it where
it is and watch one person die, the utilitarian would flip the switch
to save more lives, the deontologist would perform his duty not to do
anything which harms others, and the virtues moralist would put
himself in this position so many times that they habitually do the
right thing (which, incidentally, is also an episode of "The Good Place").

But going back to my theme: it seems most people are
deontologists. There is a open question as to why this is. But one can
imagine a good explanation.

Let's start at the beginning. Early civilization, or even earlier -
hunter gatherer tribes. We know that based on history and
anthropology, early humans lived in a world not of atomic individuals
but of societies, societies built on relationships. Duty was bound to
be one of the central concepts holding societies together. In such a
case, it is easy to conceive of duties - something you have to do to
keep your place in society. The payoff was obvious; in some cases, you
were the beneficiary of duties performed by others. In other cases, it
may not have been any individual, but the tribe in general. In any
case, even if you didn't receive any benefit yourself, by doing your
duty, at least you got to live. The more complex the social unit and
culture, the more elaborate the system of duties spelled out inside
society. By the time of civilizations and the early religions, it
would be hard to tell if it was the religion that was the source of
those duties, or if the religion existed to explain those duties.

Seen in this light, utilitarianism is an enlightenment-era
innovation. To think of humankind as a whole as the beneficiary of
ethical action is far removed from those earlier concepts of
duties. Indeed, there is a good case to be made that not just
utilitarianism but other enlightenment-era moralities were proposed as
correctives for moralities that centered on duties that were no longer
seen as ethical but simply those of coercion: duties of serfs toward a
regent or king, duties of slaves toward a master, duties of men toward
their church.

