---
title: The Three Voids of Philosophy
---

I should confess some trepidation on this. I'm a philosophy amateur. I
haven't had an academic training in the discipline, and given how many
outsiders have produced bad philosophy, I don't consider this a good
thing. I've read just enough to be dangerous, and hopefully, make sure
I don't make bad logical errors.

That being said, I've read a fair bit, much of it fairly recent, and
it does broaden my thought to some extent. Not as much as it should,
honestly, particularly if you read current philosophy!

People think of philosophy as about "the big ideas" - think of Hegel's
grand cycles of history, or the idealists of the nineteenth century
posing a "universal mind" in which the physical world is just a matrix
inside of it; or going much further back, the "Platonic World," where
all of the universal concepts exist in a world of perfection outside
of this one. Given this background, twentieth century philosophy seems
unusually small bore. Instead of big ideas, the past hundred years
have instead seen a capitulation to a certain constrained materialist
outlook. The reasons are legion - the triumph of materialist
positivism in late nineteenth century thought; the rise of the
analytic school of philosophy in the early twentieth century that
regarded many metaphysical ideas as being nothing more than "word
games"; an onward march of scientific progress that resulted in many
of the core issues unders discussion being abandoned by the field of
philosophy as pursuits of an essentially scientific nature. By
midcentury, the field was dominated by set theorists, analytic
philosophers, determined that everything be seen, proven and
rigorously defined, and their continental mirror-cousins the
deconstructionists, who were only certain that nothing was
knowable. And if the field of philosophy itself was not so uniform and
monochromatic, the major figures one might read about in the popular
press certainly were.

Likewise, suppose one takes take a Philosophy 101 course. In it, you
will encounter terminology describing some of the major fields covered by
philosophy:

* The Mind/Body Problem
* Metaphysics
* Teleology
* Ethics
* Values, e.g. "The Good, The Beautiful," Aesthetics, etc.

These are all fields of study going back to the great Greek
philosophers. However, if you walk up to many of your philosophy
professors and say you are going to do your thesis in one of these
fields, you will find your studies to be strongly constrained. If you
read philosophy books aimed at the general public, you will find out
why quickly - these areas are no longer considered the stuff of
serious philosophy. How did these once-great areas of study become
obsolete?

The reason is because the dominant strain in philosophy for the past
century and a half has been materialist, and materialist philosophy
has very little use for discussions of these concepts. The Mind/Body
problem is regarded as solved; your mind is a phantom of your brain,
and your thoughts can be traced by by electrical signals in your
brain; your consciousness is just a trick created by your brain, as is
your sense of free will. The mechanics, still unknown, are left to the
reader, as it is assumed that science will solve it for
us. Metaphysics is essentially regarded as useless untestable magical
claims. Teleology, the study of the purpose of things, is no better,
as nothing can be claimed to have any purpose, as things simply _are_.
Finally, ethics, aesthetics and other value-driven judgements are
regarded as essentially human concerns, and are value-neutral
concepts, either defined arbitrarily by culture or validated only by
evolutionary fitness. Either way, all of these fields are presumed to
be based on untestable claims and therefore worthless; or perhaps the
stuff of relativism and cultural studies, interesting, but not
Philosophy.

In 2012 Thomas Nagel penned a short end-of-career book titled _Mind &
Cosmos_ that seemed to break with this outlook. The book came with
what is probably a purposely provocative subtitle: "Why the
Materialist Neo-Darwinian Conception of Nature Is Almost Certainly
False." The subtitle, possibly thrust upon him by the publisher,
certainly didn't help his cause, as he doesn't offer the strong proof
his subtitle would require. But in spite of the title, Nagel's thrust
was clear: he feels philosophy has unnecessarily constrained itself by
presuming a strongly materialist, darwinian viewpoint of nature, when
the proof of this nature is not nearly as strong as
presumed. Critically, if one thinks that concepts like teleology,
values or ethics and sentient consciousness are actually things in and
of themselves, rather than illusory daemons created by a wetware
desparate to look for patterns, then the book argues that you _must_
go outside of materialist philosophy -  because materialist philosophy
denies all of these things as having meaning.

Roughly, the main thesis of the book is that science has claimed too
much territory for itself; the mind-body problem, far from being a
purely mechanical question of neurons, is a pervasive problem far from
being solved; and that the present sciences are too limited to yet
yield the definitive answers it claims:

    It may be frustrating to acknowledge, but we are simply at the
    point in the history of human thought at which we find ourselves,
    and our successors will make discoveries and develop forms of
    understanding of which we have not dreamt. Humans are addicted to
    the hope for a final reckoning, but intellectual humility requires
    that we resist the temptation to assume that tools of the kind we
    now have are in principle sufficient to understand the universe as
    a whole. Pointing out their limits is a philosophical task,
    whoever engages in it, rather than part of the internal pursuit of
    science—though we can hope that if the limits are recognized, that
    may eventually lead to the discovery of new forms of scientific
    understanding.

    Nagel, Thomas. Mind and Cosmos: Why the Materialist Neo-Darwinian
    Conception of Nature Is Almost Certainly False (p. 3). Oxford
    University Press. Kindle Edition.

Nagel's book spends much of this time probing areas in which science,
and therefore materialistic philosphy has fallen short, and posits
that there are unseen aspects of reality that are involved. This
problem is not the fact that philosophers have these theories; it's
the fact that this theory claims a very large number of them, whom
will not countenance any alternatives:

   My target is a comprehensive, speculative world picture that is
   reached by extrapolation from some of the discoveries of biology,
   chemistry, and physics... among the scientists and philosophers who
   do express views about the natural order as a whole, reductive
   materialism is widely assumed assumed to be the only serious
   possibility. (p. 4)

In the book's conclusion, he calls for humility in the current
scientific and philosophical establishment, given the reach of what we
do not know:

    ... I would like to extend the boundaries of what is not
    regarded as unthinkable, in light of how little we really
    understand about the world. It would be an advance if the secular
    theoretical establishment, and the contemporary enlightened
    culture which it dominates, could wean itself of the materialism
    and Darwinism of the gaps — to adapt one of its own pejorative
    tags. (p. 127)

For the most part, in spite of Nagel's considerable reputation, the
book seemed to have been received with mediocre reviews. The part that
caused the most objection was its argument against evolution itself as
a complete explanation of the current world. Nagel claims we still
don't know enough about the mechanics of how life actually started or
evolved from simple prototypical life into complex forms, or why
evolution would have produced sentience and consciousness, and there
is no reason to believe that science will be able to answer these
questions with the tools they have today. Strongly materialist
philosophers and the "New Atheists" rejected this argument _in toto_;
having read some of the reviews, one gets the idea that they did not
so much read the book as skim the first third of the book for
quotations that they could take offense to. They seemed particularly
incensed that Nagel had some sympathy for the Intelligent Design
community, in spite of his having serious disagreements with them. For
many philosophers, this is consorting with the enemy, the friends of
dread Religion. But even more fair-minded observers indicated that his
proofs were quite weak; in particular, his assertion that we don't
know the mechanics of how life evolved from non-life seems to ignore
the last twenty-odd years of research in the field.

I very liked this book, though not his arguments against evolution,
which I also found unpersuasive. This was only part of the book.  I
felt this was hardly the main thrust of the argument, even though some
may claim that without proving this point, entire argument falls
apart. But I appreciated something he attempted far more
consequential: an attempt to restore meaningful discussions around
concepts that still deserve addressing; concepts that in spite of
their intrinsic importance have been swept aside as untestable,
unverifiable, ill-posed or meaningless.

-------------------------------

Supposing you are a reflective person. Being such a person, you might
think reflective thoughts. "What is my purpose in life?" "What am I
doing here?" "How do I know what is good, is good?" "What does it mean
to be a good persion?" "Do my ethical choices matter?" You may even
ask this of your friends. Depending on your friends, they may tell you
to just put down the bong and stop asking dumb questions. But for the most
part, this has been the stuff of philosophy.

Unfortunately, the response from the most popular philosophy writers
and/or scientists posing as philisophy writers will also be "You heard
him, put down the bong." They will generally regard all of these
questions as inheritly meaningless. "Well, it depends upon what you
think _good_ means," or "'Am I a good person?'  is a meaningless
question, that isn't something you can test," or "The notion of
'purpose' is meaningless, you just are." When such people are asking
these questions, they are not being Socratic and forcing you to
better define and clarify your thought. No, the reason is because they
don't even approve of the line of inquiry. Legitimate questions stick
to certain subjects, particularly those amenable to scientific
inquiry; and anything else is fundamantally unverifiable and therefore
illegitimate. Not all philosophers believe this, of course, but this
mindset seems to be exactly what Nagel is targeting here.

It should be set at the outset that not all philosophers believe this;
Nagel is hardly a voice calling from the wilderness. The impression
that all philosophers speak in one voice is probably a consequence of
market segmentation in nonfiction books. The number of people who
read philosophy casually is vanishingly small; the number of
professional practitioners, much smaller still. If you want to publish
philosophy that is actually read, as opposed to mearly cited by some
other philosophy publication, you have to print what someone wants to
read. And what people want to read, apparently, is either
justification for the sort of skeptical materialist outlook that has
represented the dominant world view. There is an equally large
section situated elsewhere in the bookstore given to sloppy
refutations of this world view aimed at "people of Faith."
Unfortunately this book, being one of the rare examples
of a trade press book fitting into neither camp, has unfortunately
been stuck in to the latter camp, in spite of Nagel's professed
atheism.

While the reception given Nagel's message is unfortunate dismissal, my
hope is that it will still prove one more voice of encouragement
toward moving philosophers away from their present circumscribed
fields. In particular, there are three "voids" which twentieth century
thought scurried away from that need revisiting. These also happen to
three of the main themes in Nagel's book:

* Free will and consciousness
* Purpose
* Values and Ethics

Currently, of the first two fields, many materialists claim these are
not worth studying - they are concepts that simply don't exist in any
meaningful way; as I mentioned above; consciousness, free will and
purpose are rendered all meaningless questions, caused by defects in
our wetware that cause us to think we have all three when we have
none. This leaves things like values and ethics, which have received a
serious amount of study, but mainly in attempts to wrench their
definition from a materialist world view that yields little in the way
of evidence to such an endeavor. The result is simply to leave such
questions as identical to studies of preference.

In my mind, the handling of ethics and political philosophy is
particularly tricky in the case of materialist philosophers. I find
Nagel's assertion that pure materialism is incompatible with moral
realism (the belief that there is such a thing as "right and wrong"
independent of cultural norms) particularly compelling. But absent
such a structure, it seems difficult to justify political philosophy
except as a means of classify existing systems without choosing
sides. While I respect writers such as Popper, Rawls and a lot of the
pragmatists who have tried to justify ethics and liberal governance
under generally materialist frameworks, not all philosophers are
either so thoughtful or concerned about preserving them.

Instead, many writers, particularly the scientists posing as philosophers,
rely on a flawed ethics known as "naturalism." Naturalism is a sort of
common-sense ethics that says, in effect, "humans are supposed to be
good because it is in our nature to be good and cooperative." Among
those who study ethics, naturalism is thought of as a fallacy; one
cannot rely on "human nature" as a foundation. The flaw in naturalism
is obvious - just because someone says that it's "human nature"
(whatever that means) to act a certain way doesn't mean _I_ should act
in that way. It's human nature to get angry at rivals and hurt
them; does that make it OK to do so?  None of the writers that I've
referred to above make an arguments based on human nature. But this
hasn't stopped writers from using this flawed justification.

In particular, many of the "new atheist" writers labor under the naive
presumption that enlightened ethics and liberal democratic governance
are commonsense corrolaries of materialist philosophy, that simply
flow from the way "we're supposed to be." Based on this, they make
their grand claim that purging mankind of the religious impulse
will result in an upswing of morality and respect for democratic norms
everywhere. We don't have to go back and look at the examples of
Stalinist USSR or Maoist China to see that this isn't a natural
consequence of the imposition of atheistic philosophies; we can simply look at
current events that show this to be increasingly naive, as recent
democratic failures have trended with _increasing_ secularism
throughout Europe and America. To address the obvious objection to
this logic, support for nationalists is strongest by far among those
who claim a religious identity but do not practice their
religion. Examination will show that among dedicated believers, these
movements have far less support. Lest such atheist writers thing I am
practicing the "true scotsmans" fallacy, it is notable that a large
chunk of the alt-right are also self-proclaimed agnostics who feel
their religion is cultural signifier only. Serious atheistic
philosophers such as John Gray have been vocal in pointing out that
atheism, far from being conducive to ethical conduct and democracy,
settles nothing in the ethical sense. So it isn't just the religious
that have problems with this line of reasoning.

Once one throws out the arguments of the atheistic evangelists,
leaving the most serious philosophical writings, one is left with this
unpromising fact: materialist philosophy hasn't given much of a
consensus on what good ethical behavior is. This is probably because
such philosophers have no common point of agreement to work forward
from. Where materialist philosophers have managed to develop coherent
ethical frameworks, it is because they have posited universal ideals
that are decidedly nonmaterial, and presumed that mankind should
aspire to these ideals, just... because. For instance, the ideal of
Justice, as written by Rawls and others, may be practiced by material
beings operating in a material univers, but Justice itself is an
interloper from a different platonic universe, and fits into our
three-dimentional material world no more naturally than a tesseract.

While Nagel's book may have been animated by his distrust of the promise
of future scientific breakthroughs to explain the origin of life
(something referred to elsewhere as "promissary materialism"), he
seems just as motivated by materialism's incompatibility with _ethical
realism_. Ethical realism is the notion that there are such things
that are _right_ and _wrong_ independent of cultural or relative
concerns. He explains his position thusly:

    My insistence that realism about value is not a metaphysical
    postulation of extra entities or properties might suggest that
    realism has no implications for the natural order. However, that
    is not the case. In essence, I agree with Sharon Street’s position
    that moral realism is incompatible with a Darwinian account of the
    evolutionary influence on our faculties of moral and evaluative
    judgment. Street holds that a Darwinian account is strongly
    supported by contemporary science, so she concludes that moral
    realism is false. I follow the same inference in the opposite
    direction: since moral realism is true, a Darwinian account of the
    motives underlying moral judgment must be false, in spite of the
    scientific consensus in its favor.  (p. 105)

Street's position, as reference by Nagel, is that humankind has been shaped by
evolution, and our morals are social characteristics that have been selected
for fitness, and not anything representing concepts of _right_ or
_wrong_. This does not mean that one cannot believe in both evolution
and moral realism at the same time; what it does mean, is you cannot
extract moral realism from our evolved material nature. Evolution
selects for reproductive fitness only, and we can all think of immoral
acts one may commit that will increase our reproductive
choices. Indeed, there are entire industries dedicated to that.

Sometimes Nagel can seem to take this line of thinking a bit far. Not
only is there no reason whatsoever to presume that evolution has
selected for moral reason, he also claims that there is no reason to
think that evolution would have selected for our ability to know and
recognize truth; this again, follows along the lines of Street's
argument. Here, his ground seems a bit weaker. If one is a pure
pragmatist, who believes there is no such thing as a corresponding
truth, then perhaps evolution can explain our definition of truth
somewhat. But one can be believe in both evolution while knowing that
evolution has actually selected for situations in which we believe
absolute total falsehoods. There is a whole subfield of behavior
sciences dedicated to studying areas in which our brains do not select
for truth. The popular text on this, Kahneman's _Thinking Fast and
Slow_, provides plenty of examples of this.

But this, I believe, points back to the main point Nagel wants to
make. We can all think of immoral actions we can take to increase our
reproductive choices. We can all think of times we've been changed our
minds and felt something that was once false is now true. The point
Nagel is making is that we seem to have these innate facilities that
recognize these points, but there is no way to explain these
facilities through evolution. Our ability to recognize certain
abstract truths, what Nagel refers to as "mind-independent" truths,
would be selected for in no way by evolutionary fitness. It would be
odd indeed if such a facility was simply coincidental happenstance to
exist in the one specimin of hominids that exist today. Barring such
an unusual concidence, the existence of this facility must be due to
some other sort of agent, one not explained by evolutionary mechanics.

This line of thinking is a point Nagel harkens to repeatedly. Think of
the famous mind-body problem and consciousness. True, we can trace
back certain mental impulses back to electrical signals in the
brain. But this does not explain the fact that we actually feel
something. Those who associate our feeling of consciousness and self
with electrical signals have confused the territory with the
map. There is no explanation of how our feeling of "self" arises from
electrical signals in the brain; while the two are certainly
correlated, there is no explanation how one arises from the
other. Regarding materialist strategies of explaining consciousness,
such as "psycho-phisicla identity theory", he states:

    These strategies have taken increasingly sophisticated form, under
    the headings of causal behaviorism, functionalism, and other
    theories of how mental concepts could refer to states of the brain
    in virtue of the causal role of those states in controlling the
    interaction between the organism and its environment. But all such
    strategies are unsatisfactory for the same old reason: even with
    the brain added to the picture, they clearly leave out something
    essential, without which there would be no mind. And what they
    leave out is just what was deliberately left out of the physical
    world by Descartes and Galileo in order to form the modern concept
    of the physical, namely, subjective appearances. (p. 40)

In general, the explanation of humans as a physical "meat machine" is
certainly possible, but there is no explanation of the _qualia_ that
gives rise to sentience. We could just as well be robotic automatons
and yet be carrying out the same actions.

Nagel, in fact, believes consciousness itself to be one of the most
significant features of our world - so much so that it cannot be posed
as being due to pure happenstance, as materialists are wont to do:

    So long as the mental is irreducible to the physical, the
    appearance of conscious physical organisms is left unexplained by
    a naturalistic account of the familiar type. On a purely
    materialist understanding of biology, consciousness would have to
    be regarded as a tremendous and inexplicable extra brute fact
    about the world. If it is to be explained in any sense
    naturalistically, through the understanding of organic life,
    something fundamental must be changed in our conception of the
    natural order that gave rise to life. (pp. 45-46)

To this, materialist philosophers do have a rather credible argument -
consciousness is, in fact, a complete accident in our material
world. We were lucky to have evolved sentience, and luckier still to
have the intelligence enough to argue about such matters. This seems
to be the philosophical version of the "parallel worlds" theory of why
certain cosmological constants are balanced such that life exists -
essentially, that they aren't balanced, it's just we would only turn
up on the worlds that allow for life.

Getting back to the main point, I feel that materilistic philosophy is
giving up "too much"; by presuming that our understanding of the
universe will never change in a significant way and that all we have
yet to do is fill in the gaps in ever-more-inscrutable quantum
mechanics, they also make the presumption that we can have definite
knowledge of the answer to these big questions. And that answer is:
there is no answer. There is no answer to our purpose in life; there
is no free will to ponder over; there is no universal ethics to aspire
to. We simply have to muddle through as best we can with the tools at
hand.

---------------------------

The rather powerful report to all of this is, "So what?" While this
non-answer answer seem negative to some, others would welcome it. A
pure materialist would at least have consistency on his or her
side. The answer "there is no answer" is, at the very least, one
requiring a very simple world, one free of as-yet-unknown mechanics
behind our consciousness or platonic universes from which independent
ethical principles are derived. Such a person has achieved true
freedom in both the intellecual and ethical sense, and is free to make
his way in the universe as he sees fit. What one does with this
freedom is one's personal philosophy, and a host of philosophies were
developed in the twentieth century to cater to this freedom.

The problem is that are questions that still need answering, where the
answer "There is no answer" will not do. In particular, there are
real, difficult problems of collective governance and purpose facing
humanity, and there is no guarantee that a materialistic, libertarian
philosophical path is suited toward solving these problems. Presently,
reductive materialism is seen by the intelligentia as the only
serious, rigorous framework for the analysis of problems. It is one
thing to adopt such a framework as a working hypothesis; it is yet
another thing if one insists it is the _only_ workable hypothesis, and
in so doing, leads to the premature drawing of conclusions producing
harmful effects.

In matters of personal morality, the matter of walking away from
ethics would seem to be significant. The only defensible creed arising
from materialisism is essentially Do What Thou Wilt. This sounds like
a rather dark creed, but at least it is easy to defend. If one is not
a fink and just happens to just have a noble disposition, one can lead
an exemplary life. If you're horrible, you get to be horrible, but
fortunately most people are not horrible. The "new atheists"
frequently posit that atheists as a whole are more ethical than
people of faith, and they are eager to cite studies showing a
statistically significant (if small) differences showing that. On a
personal note, I would probably get along much better with a crowd of
atheists than a crowd of fundamentalists. Is the solution, then, an
hands-off libertarianism?  Allowing everyone to make their way in this
world as they see fit?

If you think this properly reflects the beliefs of the more strident
materialists and atheists, you are quite mistaken. In their writings,
concepts like guarantees of personal liberty, equality before the law,
and the host of rights accorded with left-of-center societies are
presumed to arise naturally out of the matrix of material law. Ideals
I love, but hardly fitting into a libertarian philosophy. These
writers are instead quite insistent that the primary roadblock to this
are metaphysics and postulation of greater entities, unethical
presumptions that distort human nature and explain Why We Can't Have
Nice Things like competent functioning democracies and healthy,
ethical civic lives. Unfortunately, this is nothing more than wishful
thinking. The framework of universal rights and liberal governance did
not spring from a materialistic basis. However much one may dislike
Neitchze, one cannot simply discard his arguments simply because they
lead to inconvenient conclusions.

Not all atheistic philosophers are this inconsistent. One can believe
in a moral realism or ethical universals and still hold that the
essence of the universe is essentially mechanical _as a working
theory_. What one cannot do is hold lofty assertions of moral realisms
and universal rights, and then at the same time hold a theory of
nature that gives these assertions no foundation, all the while
attacking those who presume any different foundation rests on
superstition. Why?  Because under strict materialism, appeals to
brotherly love or universal rights or even simply the survival of the
human race and the planet so that "we can keep the conversation going"
are not obvious conclusions of a materialistic worldview; they are
much more easily explained as the dictates of faulty wetware and
sentimentality. One cannot invoke extrauniversals like "natural law"
and "justice" as if they are platonic ideals, when the only existence
they actually have is as private propery of certain
sufficiently-complex biological neural networks; compelling to the
thinker, but hardly compelling enough to result in enforcement of
behavioral norms on others. Under such a worldview, humans are free to
work together and build their Leviathan or whatever government they
want, but they had best be resigned to the knowledge that this is a
result of their own selfish impulses; nothing grander actually exists.

Moving on from the subject of individual ethics, there is possibly an
even more problem compelling problem of collective ethics. Shared
ethics requires a framework agreed to widely by society as a
whole. Mankind is currently faced with crises if, badly handled, could
easily lead to the collective suicide of the human race. In the case
one holds a purely materialist viewpoint, there is a real question as
to whether or not this mass suicide is really such an issue. If the
death of humanity and the snuffing out of what may be an extremely
rare case of evolved sentient creatures is fated, then it is of no
difference to The Universe. We are just one more species on one
insignificant planet fated to fall victim to the Great Filter of
Fermi and doomed to extinction.

If, however, these assumptions are mistaken, then there is a real
possiblity that failing to grapple with these
letting everyone figure the answer out for
oneself 




