---
title: The Uses of Philosophy
---

# The Uses of Philosophy

or

### Don't We Know Everything Already, Anyway?

I've of late been embarking on a study of philosophy. Part of this is to
fill in a void in my educational background - being in engineering at
a mediocre state school, I had little education in the Liberal
Arts. But there is a bigger question - what is philosophy good for,
anyway? How does it help the world, and more specifically, the causes I'm
interested in helping?

Philosophy itself is certainly not a field for popular study. It has a
reputation as being excessively pointy-headed. This can be seen in the
split between serious philosophy and books that sell as philosophy. If
you go into a large enough bookstore, it will have its own philosophy
section - mostly full of Penguin classics, books about atheism and its
defenders, and various readers. However, you are unlikely to see
anything "current" unless it happens to be controversial. Someone,
upon surveying this, might think there are probably only a few
conceivable goals one might have to study philosophy. Perhaps one may
do this to either appear "well rounded" in conversation by
familiarizing oneself with ideas of import in the past, no matter how
disregarded or unscientific these ideas are. Or perhaps one have an
antireligous interest, for which the philosophy section appears to be
a religious book section for atheists. They, too, may want to read
books to assure themselves that they are right, and all those _other
people_ are stupid, evil or both.

I suppose the classical goals of philosophy are really the good ones -
the study of truth and how to discover it. But that is something the
field itself seems to have given up on. Science seems to have claimed
for itself the seat of truth. Indeed, many scientists themselves
believe there is now no use of philosophy, just as there is no use to
religion. If something is emperically testable, then it is part of
Science; if not, then it is not the place for the study of
truth. Given the developments in the late nineteenth and early
twentieth century, philosophy itself seemed to assist in this effort,
as positivists and analytic philosophers heaped scorn on philosophical
exercises like metaphysics and nonemperical approaches, essentially
leaving only scientifically testable truths as the ones worth
studying. If that is the case then, perhaps philosophy is a decent
place to learn how to form arguments, think logically and properly
conduct forensics; a worthy goal, but hardly about finding grand
truths.

If that is the case, is that all there is? A way to improve one's
argumentation, and nothing more than a study of techniques? It may be
so, but that seems hardly a noble goal. Much as the classical sophists
placed argumentation over actual truth, a modern student of philosophy
may be more interested in winning the argument and persuading, actual
truth and facts being besides the point. Here again, as different set
of twentieth century philosophers can assist this effort, as many have
assailed truth itself as a social construct, perhaps imposed by those
in power. And there have been other concerns by philosophers that any
attempt to establish truth definitively may be harmful, if the end
result is to attempt a final edifice to be imposed upon poeple. While
such arguments have some compelling moral insights, the movement away
from truth may give philosophy itself a bad name. Indeed, I recently
read an article on Brexit, which has proven itself to be a bad idea
sold through lies. Their theory was that the British political class
was heavily educated in philosophy due to their elite background,
producing a generation of "rotters" whose main skill was at debating
on their feet and hoodwinking people in arguments instead of producing
things of value; truth was never a concern for such people.

A better approach may be to regard philosophy as invaluable tool in
the _search_ for truth. The American pragmatist school, which is much
less influential than it was a century ago, has never claimed to be
about the study of any single truth per se, and some have charged them
with being relativists. But there is something to be said that giving
people the tools to be able to search for truth for themselves is
invaluable. And note that by the "search for truth," I'm not talking
about the solipistic tendency shared by all to seek out confirming
views of our existing biases; instead, it gives the tools to think
critically about ones views and purge from them the errors that tend
to creep into the thinking of all.

Finally, if philosophy is the study of truth, what does that do of
religion, which also claims to be the study of truth? Well, some
scientists (and they aren't all atheists!) will tell you there are two
_magesteria_, such as they call it. Science is for the study of
certain truths, religion is for the study of certain truths not
illuminated by scientists, and perhaps philosophy is about how these
work together. But that doesn't really indicate how this works in
practice. 