#About That Memo at Google That Has Conservatives Talking

Everyone seems to be talking about this. I don't like writing about
politics. I don't like talking about politics. For one, doing so is
[](kinda-sorta against my beliefs). But mainly, it's for the same
reason I don't talk about religion much - those with the strongest
opinions always seem to be the loudest, the most obnoxious, and the
most ill-informed. Wading into such conversations is a bit like going
into a hunting convention in a deer costume. Nobody with
half-a-brain would shoot at you, but you could get shot at just the
same.

I've read the screed and spent a lot of time trying to figure what the
hubub was about, and I think I see the problem. It isn't obvious at
first blush; unlike most writings espousing this viewpoint, it's
actuall written with respect for the reader by someone who bothered to
footnote their sources. I suppose some people think that in itself
should entitle one to a hearing - in reality that's the LEAST you can
do to sell your viewpoint to others. In any case, that's the only good
thing that can be said about it.
The actual content is a tenditious piece of research, the goal of which
is to try to eliminate efforts to bring more women into
the technology workforce. I do think most of the criticisms against were
over the top and ludicrous (to use someone else's words:
[https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/the-google-memo-isnt-the-interesting-part-of-the-story/2017/08/11/de3f8876-7ecb-11e7-9d08-b79f191668ed_story.html?hpid=hp_no-name_opinion-card-d%3Ahomepage%2Fstory&utm_term=.1dd609fb5d24]("
piling onto one problematic software engineer as a stand-in for a
whole system of oppression is a distraction from [your] larger
goals")).

In my opinion, the only point in the guy's favor - and it's a big one
- is
that he wrote on an open forum where there was an _implicit presumption
that all ideas were on the table_. It does very little good to have
such a forum and then after-the-fact fire somebody based on their
operation in a forum where there seemed to be an implicit guarantee
that all ideas are on the table. I've heard the
author is attempting legal remedies. In a normal situation, I'd say
the guy has no case; but if he does, it will be for this reason and
this reason only. In which case, the rightness or wrongness of his missive
is really beside the point. The unfortunate end game for American
corporations is clear - no company
of any size is going to ever support any such forum EVER. So we know
where this is heading.

Meanwhile, the discussions I've seen are missing some crucial context
- context it's defenders seem naively bereft and detractors have
shockingly not bothered to eduate anyone about. I'm not trying to
defend the current situation. I'm just stating some facts that
everyone is ignoring, because, you know, they would much rather
support "their side." *GROANS*

First of all, part of the hubub is the fact that the CEO loudly defended this
firing. Do you think this might have had to do anything with the fact
that
[http://www.nydailynews.com/news/national/lawyer-prepping-suit-google-wage-disparity-article-1.3396128](Google
is preparing to defend themselves AGAINST A CLASS ACTION LAWSUIT FOR
DISCRIMINATORY PAY)??? Naaaah I'm sure this action has NOTHING to do
with that at all.

Let's be clear about HR departments like the one that removed the
author: they really don't exist to support development of resources,
as much as they would want it to. Instead, they spend most of their
time MAKING SURE THE COMPANY DOESN'T GET SUED. And having a case where
tons of employees are passing around a paper saying "the reason we
don't have enough women is because most of them just aren't built
suitably to work at Google" really really REALLY makes the job of
lawsuit-proofing the company quite difficult.

The central fact, from an HR point of view, is that this employee
committed the most impolitic career move anyone has done this year by
putting his employer in an absolute no-win situation. Imagine what
would have happened if, instead of quoting a bunch of evolutionary
psychologists to defend a lack of women at the company, he had instead
[https://www.amazon.com/Bell-Curve-Intelligence-Structure-Paperbacks/dp/0684824299/](started
quoting guys like these) to defend the fact there are so few
African-Americans at Google. Well, no one did, even though I'm sure
some people at Google think that way. You see, no one did and no
one will ever do this because they know IF THEY DID THEY WOULD GET
FIRED BY HR IMMEDIATELY. And that, of course, is the whole point -
someone evidently did the exact same thing with women! Please keep in
mind that the author's name was attached to this statement, and he had
women co-workers who are no doubt reading this stuff. Doesn't that
seem, in hindsight, to be a little dim? Yet that's what he did, and
he's asking his employer, who has undergone substantial criticism and
may be facing lawsuits on this issue, to stand by his right to defend
these things. This is what one career-advice podcaster refers to as a
"career-limiting move."

Another related point is that we don't have the whole story
here. It was said to have gone "viral"; we don't know if this was a
result of people spontaneously passing this stuff around, or it was
part of an orchestrated campaign by a lot of ticked off alt-righters
in Google, perhaps including the writer themselves. The fact that the
author has seem happy to throw his lot with alt-righters who are
defending this as some sort of "free speech" makes one wonder if the
whole thing was a setup. But whether it was spontaneous or orchestrated, HR
at Google has a right to be pooping their pants. If it was due to a
loosely orchestrated campaign,
they have to fire not only him, but find whoever was the ringleader
because of said class-action lawsuits. And if it was all spontanous,
HR has a *real* problem, and they might start putting together that
settlement fund now and get ahead of the curve.

The last part is my anti-partisan screed, and perhaps the whole point
of this.

Many conservatives (and it seems to be mostly conservatives
that have taken much umbrage) make much of the fact that the writing
itself is written respectfully and is reasearched (look, with actual
footnotes!) and that alone should buy some respect. All good for
normal, reasonable argumentation. As I've said, it's a bit odd to
regard as a mark in your favor since this is the _minimum_ a
conscientious person would do to defend a controvertial position; <irony>
so much for the conservative complaints of people wanting a trophy
just for showing up.</irony>

Unfortunately, if you want to support a controversial argument like
this, you would do best to insist that the argument stand alone and on
its merits. Instead, there is a subtext insisting that the reason the
argument was not well received was that Google's culture was
"oppresive" to conservative viewpoints, not due to any
wrongness. Indeed, much of the document is spent discussing the need to
encourage tolerance of open discussions of conservative
viewpoints. By bolting his anti-diversity argument part and parcel to
a conservative viewpoint, he seems to be insisting that whole thing is
a viewpoint that MUST deserve special consideration in the name of "tolerance."

Worse yet, let's be blunt about this: those who do not buy into a
conservative world view are now of limited patience with conservative
handling of scientific topics. When you write AS A CONSERVATIVE on
race, women's rights, or climate science, and you prop up your
argument with anything other than encyclopedic, bulletproof argument,
it isn't going to be well-received because NOBODY WHO ISN'T ON YOUR
SIDE WANTS YOU TO "WIN."
Anyone who has every debated a dittohead
knows that if you concede the slightest little point with them, all
you ever do is encourage the bastards. It doesn't bring the argument
to a close; instead, they will misinterpret agreement as weakness and
continue to press their case. This is a weakness not of
conservativism, but of being partisans - someone whose argument is
driven by a desire to "win" for "their side," truth be damned. So
arguments from a partisan viewpoint are generally regarded with
immeasurably more skepticism that those from a dispassionate
viewpoint. One imagines that the writer, who probably unwittingly
offended the bulk of his female co-workers in engineering, could've
probably learned something in those boring HR lectures, but his mind
wasn't prepared to engage; instead, he probably was spent the whole
time dreaming of arguments to "put them libtards in their place."

The author frames much of his missive as a plea for tolerance of
opposing viewpoints, but as far as what I value an employer, tolerance
for opposing viewpoints is a far distant second to the desire to look
for truth honestly. The people backing this writing should honestly
look at things from other people's point of view and understand
exactly what other people get from giving you a hearing. If a woman
agreed with you, would _you_ turn around and agree that women have
real concerns with this environment, and that they deserve a better
environment? Or would she have to come around to your viewpoint that
she should just "suck it up and not be so sensitive" becase you're
right and she's wrong? I think I know the answer.

I should say that whenever someone identifies himsel as a progressive,
liberal, socialist, whatever I DON'T TRUST THEM EITHER. PEOPLE WHO
ADHERE TO A PARTISAN AGENDA ARE NOT TO BE TRUSTED. It is one thing to
say "I have conservative beliefs." It is another to identify oneself
as a conservative, particular if one claims some sort of special
status for oneself as a _protected group_. Do you feel aggreived?
Welcome to the club.

#Some REAL Advice to the Guy Who Wrote That Google Screed

The problem is this guy is honestly a victim. But not for the reason
he thinks he is. So this section.

This section is not just to [http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2017/08/07/google_fires_engineer_who_authored_anti_diversity_memo.html](that guy). The guy who wrote [https://gizmodo.com/exclusive-heres-the-full-10-page-anti-diversity-screed-1797564320](this, um, thing).

Instead, this is to any guy who has ever been contaminated by contact
with certain proponents of an aggressive strain of "evolutionary
psychology."

Note the irony quotes.  Yes, you're victims. But not
vitims of feminists, "the left," or whatever horesh!t bogeyman you are
blaming for your predicament.

I'm gonna guess you aren't getting it a whole lot. Amirite?

Take it from someone who knows. There is one - and only one - reason
for reading evolutionary psychology books. It isn't because you're
conservative, concerned with sexisim, or scientifically minded. It's
because you're unsuccessful at dating. And let's face it - if it's one
thing that unites the gamergate and the alt-right folk, it's the fact
that they're uniformly unsuccessful with women in every way.

If you aren't one of those guys, let me tell you about evolutionary
psychology books. Evolutionary psychology sounds like science, but it isn't.
It is a form of pop psychology. As a pure scientific field, it is
still too embryonic to draw conclusions from it; as a pop psychology
genre, well... it would be kind to
the field to say it lacks rigor.

I suppose it started out like a lot
of pop-psychology fads do. In the 80s and 90s some psychologists found some
interesting things using rigorous, statistical experiments
nd put some psychology theories in place. To
figure out why things were, they posited that _some_ of these effects
may be due to evolutionary pressures. So far, so good. Over time, of
course, the books became less rigorous and more self-helpy. However,
unlike most self-helpy books, these books didn't target bookish women. No,
they targeted men - mostly men who weren't getting any.

I don't know how things are in Silicon Valley, but I can hazard a
pretty good guess. I was in Austin in the nineties, and I expect that
from a social point of view, things were similar. To wit: too many
educated, geeky guys with not enough women to date. So the place is
full of "evolutionary psychologists" and "dating consultants" looking
to help guys get dates.

Now obviously evolutionary psychology appeals to the more classically
"conservative" mindset that there are sex roles fixed by Mother Nature
that you shouldn't mess with. That explains why he wrote the
screed. But that doesn't explain why he read up on this stuff, enough
to have plenty of surface knowledge in that field - enough to be able
to come up with a dozen footnotes. No, I'm sure the reason he read
these books originally it is the main reason people
buy the book - because they're looking for help with dating.

Unfortunately, evolutionary psychology is a bit of a racket. It poses
all these weird mechanisms to explain things to men who haven't been
successful with women, usually men who think average Joe's are somehow
much more successful; they are flummoxed, angry with themselves and
angry with the world. Anyone in this situation is liable to latch onto
any theory that seems to explain their suffering _and_ give them a
path to escape. That's where the dating consultants come in. The
consultants are about three degrees removed from the "pick up artist"
scene; while on the surface they have nothing to do with one another,
the dynamic is the same:
* high-priced consultant tells you that you *should* be getting more dates
* and that *he* can help you
* but only if you follow his or her advice *exactly*
* and if you are unsuccessful, it will be blamed on you *not*
following this advice. 
A pretty unhealthy dynamic, but one you can make a lot of money from
at a hundred dollars a session.

I suspect my experience was typical. I went to one workshop in the
early-nineties, a time when I was also extremely unhappy about the way
things were going for me. I was, like I supect this guy is, extremely
unsuccessful. I was concerned, then in my mid-twenties and going into
my late twenties, that my failure would continue indefinitely, and if
I didn't change things I would blow whatever chance for happiness I
had. Fortunately, something kept me from buying into it. It was mostly
dumb luck that I didn't get taken in; at the time, my
bullsh!t-detector was not nearly as good as it was now.

SO, TO THAT GUY: HERE'S YOUR REAL PROBLEM

The reason that missive created such a firestorm is due to a classical
CS problem:

garbage in, garbage out. 

Fortunately, the problems evolutionary psychology sets out to explain
have much simpler causes and solutions. Such simpler explainations may
even give you the help you need. These things explain much of the
behavior you see socially, much better than any pseudoscientific
nonsense that are liable to offend masses of people once set to
papter. Additionally, by embracing a more mainstream viewpoint, you
don't have to rely on neo-Nazis and Klansmen for emotional
support. You can talk to, like, normal people.

##1. For professional men: your mid-twenties are going to be your
  WORST years dating.

A lot of guys leave college and take their baby-face with them to
their first job, in the city or suburb. If they move to take a job,
then they are having to rebuild their social scene. Doing so is much
more difficult than in college, where there were lots of built-in
mechanisms for meeting other people.

One problem is that techniques that used to work in college suddenly
get a lot less effective. You don't have a lot of places to hang
out. You probably have no place you naturally meet people of the
opposite sex. Things get a lot harder. On top of that, it seems your
luck with women have changed for the worse. The obvious cause:
FEMINISM.

LOL.

No. The cause is a change in environment. One that penalizes men much
more than women.

Now, this isn't just men - it's women too. When you have to rebuild
your entire social environment, it's a tall order. Depending on where
you live, it could be tough to make friends. Someplace with tons of
"churn" like Austin is easy; harder in a settled metropolis like
Philadelphia where it seems everyon grew up there. But in any event,
it's hard. For both men and women.

However, women don't have as steep a hill to climb; in particular, if
you are an _attractive_ woman, or even merely "cute", you will be
approached, given invitations, and generally find it easy to "get in
circulation." Additionally, women have something your young male peers
do not have - attention from a lot of older men. Indeed, a woman of
ages 22-35 is seen as dateable to virtually _any_ single men.

What about young men? Don't women also like them? Well, you hear a lot
about "cougars"; but in practice, the fact that a label like "cougar" exists
means that this is a _distinctive_ behavior. Note that there is no
word that applies to men who find younger women attractive since it's
virtually all of them. Older women generally like emotional maturity,
and that means avoiding younger men that need to be housebroken.

The upshot is that even if you live in someplace like New York City,
which is notoriously slanted against single educated women, you
actually will have a much tougher time in your mid-twenties that young
women are, as your same-age opposite-sex peers suddenly find
themselves with so many options. In all honesty, it won't get better
until your thirties. So just hang tough. When someone tells you that
you should have no problems, _ignore them_.

##2. The only thing the field has correct: height matters a LOT

There is much in the way of self-help books telling you that height
doesn't matter nearly so much as self-confidence. Truth is, I have yet
to hear a woman complain that her blind date too lacking in that
quality. However, the self-help books are correct, in that this isn't
anything you can do anything about. I personally never tried hacks
like shoe lifts, and I'm not sure they help. Your best bet, here
again, is hang tough and ignore people that tell you that you should
be having no problems or tell you to try different lines or insipid
nonsense like that.

##3. Fixing your personality will help more than anything. But don't
  count on it giving you the success you want.

The reason here is twofold. First, you can't change your height, and
if you're are reasonably well-groomed, there is little to be done
here. But you can do something about your personality. And if you're
reading alt-right forums, your personality needs plenty of fixing. But
in addition to this, working on yourself, with the help of a
psychologist, counselor, or whoever, is going to take YEARS to bear
fruit. Are you in your mid-twenties? Congratulations! That means by
the time women are closing in on thirties and are starting to give
guys like you second looks, you might actually have enough of a
personality to be deserving of their attention.

##4. To engineers especially: You don't need a change in attitude. You need a
  U-Haul.

This is a biggie. Some of the hippest, hottest places with tight job
markets are tech heavy-areas like Seattle, San Francisco, Boston and
Austin. Fun places, right? Lot's of "churn"; e.g. newcomers looking to
make friends instead of still hanging out with buddies from high
school.

Unfortunately, places with "churn" tend to be bad places
for guys, as they're more likely to move to opportunity. On top of
this, technology draws men far more disproportionately. If you are an
engineer and are not naturally attractive, think twice before settling
in one of these areas. If you do move there, figure on giving yourself
a few years and if things go bad, move. Do *not* let people tell you
your difficulties are abnormal and you need to worry about "technique"
or "self-confidence." Your difficulties are to be expected. In some of
these places, professional men outnumber professional women by almost
3 to 2. In such an environment, the more attractive women will quickly
pair up, leaving the bars full of unhappy men in the midst of
3-year-long dating dry spells. Treat your cities like you treat your
bars: if there's no women there, leave.

##5. The "chick advice" books are correct: concentrate on growing a social
  life. But don't expect it will immediately help your dating.

A lot of dating advice books, particularly those aimed at women, will
tell you to concentrate on "growing a life"; e.g. becoming more
fulfilled professionally and socially, and that things will otherwise
right themselves. If you're a young twentysomething woman, that is
absolutely true. Attractive women can have dry spells, but generally
if they do, it's because of something unhealthy; having a balanced
life allows opportunities to flower. As a man of middling looks,
this won't necessarily fix things for you. But it's the LEAST
you can do. The basement-dwelling gamergate folk are doing the
opposite of what you want to do; you need to fix yourself socially
before you can expect to even begin to succeed.

##6. Persistence pays, but you have to persist at the right things!

Some of the most horrible advice I ever had was to be persistent. Did
a woman seem hesitant? Hound her for her number. Do you like her but
is she avoiding you? Maybe she's shy and playing hard to get. In
short, a lot of advice books for men tell you to be pushy and a bit
like a jerk. That is just going to get you the sort of rejections that
will send you to the basement for the next two years. I've never in my
life found a woman who seemed cold to my advances to suddenly change
one day and start flirting with me because I wouldn't give up. It just
doesn't happen. Instead, I just acted like a jerk and felt horrible
about myself later.

Instead, you have to persist at working on yourself, as meeting as
many people as possible, and generally on not getting hopeless and
giving up. You have to count on spending hours sending out hundreds of
introductions on the dating sites and not getting discouraged when they
only result in two or three in-person meetings.  Saying that "all the
good ones are taken" isn't going to help you. If you fix what you can,
as I listed above, you are going to do a lot for yourself, and the end
result will be success. But it will take a few years.

I can't say I was ever "successful." I did marry, much later in life
than I wanted to. But if someone had outlined this advice for me, I
probably would've married earlier and been much happier. I would've
made other people happier. I would've ticked off a lot fewer people
and dumped my sense of being a victim. Hopefully I can inspire someone
to dump their evolutionary psychology books in the trash and do
something that makes them happy. And as far as those of you who browse
alt-right sites? Well, if "fat drunk and stupid is no way to go
through life," think of how much worse is it for someone who voluntarily
associated with the obsolete dung-heap of the 20th century.