---
title: Why Might a Virtue Workout Work?
category: article
---

# Why Might a Virtue Workout Work?

I have offered up a mechanism, based on what I and numerous others are
doing every day, that I think _should_ work. Skeptical reader are
invited to wonder _why_ it might work. What are the mechanisms by
which it might work?

Someone of a more traditional religious inclination may believe this
to be straightforward. "You're praying for X, God is going to give you
X if it's good for you, since you're praying for something that's good
for you you're going to get it! No?" Such a thing may not convince
many readers. It certainly wouldn't convince me - and I'm
religious. To this day I remain skeptical of "itercessionary prayer"
as conceived by most religious people. Lacking that mechanism, why
would prayer actually help you? Why would meditation or any of the
other mechanisms help you?

To answer this, it is necessary to take a step back and see what is
happening when one is "trying to be a better person."

If one had zero capacity for self-reflection, then there would be no
desire to become a better person. Why? Because there would be no
identification of any flaws in one's behavior! Someone who wants to be
a better person has an inkling that something, somewhere, there is
something wrong with one's behavior. These realizations could take
many forms; let's think of some situations many of us have been in:

* You do something habitutally; afterward, you realize this was
  something you shouldn't have done and felt guilty about it.

* You run into a stressful situation that requires you to be patient
  and thoughtful, instead you lose your cool.

* In response to a tough day at work, you pull up the phone to take
  your mind off of it. Before you realize it, it's hours later and
  you're feeling miserable after wasting your free time on Facebook
  again.

* A friend pulls you aside and says you did something rude or
  thoughtless. Part of you agrees, but part of you wonders if it's a
  big deal.

What is going on here? In all cases, one is performing an action which
one _performs without conscious decision_, and then later _regrets the
decision made_ earlier. In some cases, what is going on is one has a
bad habit - a vice, in other words. And one wishes to replace it with
a virtuous behavior. In other cases, one has limited awareness that
one has failed to behave thoughtfully, and later realizes ones mistake
or has it pointed out to them.

What is the first thing that must be done? The first thing that must
be done is one must realize there is a problem _as it is happening_.

This is much easier said than done.

If you review the "workout," such as it is, you'll see that most of it
is composed of _directed reflection_. Additionally, it is not all at
once. It is several short periods during the day - periods
specifically set aside for just such reflection. This makes even more
sense when you look at the purpose of prayer and meditation within the
context of the Baha'i Faith, from which it is drawn:
* prayer as seen as being in the presence of the Godhead
* meditation seen as looking within oneself to gain knowledg of the
true self
the it can be seen the purpose of this entire exercise is to reflect
more properly on our actions.

The root problem, when we wish to improve ourselves, is that most of
our action is automatic. Very few actions are taken under full
deliberation. In many cases, even decisions we take are not fully
deliberated; we choose things out of habit. When asked about these
decisions, we give plausible-sounding answers. We know this from
cognitive research - brain activity is seen even before we are aware
of making a decision. By the time we make a decision, it is already
made.

By setting aside this time, the goal is to bring a better awareness of
our actions to our fore. If you want to change, you have to make your
actions less habitual. "Trying" to be a better person will not work,
if your actions through the day are automatic, the only "trying" one
will do is beating oneself up after-the-fact after realizing one has
fallen short in one way or another.

So if you want to "be a better person," how should this work? It
depends upon what you're seeing:

* If you know what things you really need to work on - then this is
  pretty obvious. That's
  what you should meditate about.

* If you really don't know what to work on, but you just want to be
  "better," than you should particularly meditate on reviewing your
  own actions throughout the day. The end-of-day review could be
  particularly helpful.

This all being said - it should work. If you practice the Baha'i
Faith, it is taken on faith that it will assist you, but if not - and
even if you're not religious - then at least in theory, it should
assist in bringing awareness to your problem and helping to keep it
less habitual.

## A Caveat Regarding Social Pressure

There's one more case which requires consideration:

* You've been led to believe you're flawed based on feedback from one
  or more people.

This case can be particularly challenging.

It is possible that you really do have flaws, and you don't realize
them. And sometimes this works. Let's look at people with sociopathic
inclinations - probably the worst-case scenario. One would think that
sociopaths are rare. In fact, a few percentage of all people have this
inclination. Yet of those that have been studied, most of them are no
less successful than you or I, though perhaps peers may say they have
"rough edges." How is it that they behave normally in society? Well,
in the past, their behavior has caused them problems. They didn't
realize it on their own - they got lots of negative feedback, and
found out that lying and lashing out angrily are not acceptable in
society, and they had to curb their behavior.

However, it could be you are dealing with a broken mirror. Others may
believe you're flawed for reasons having to do with themselves
only. If you have to deal with someone who is truly toxic, they may be
able to make you feel guilty about anything that doesn't serve their
narrow interest. Peers may do the same if you fail to conform to norms
that have nothing to do with morality. Again, self-reflection is a key
guide. But when self-reflecting, you may need to be able to tune out the
voices of others in society. If you believe you are being criticized
for vices, that's one thing; if you are instead being criticized for
virtues, that is something far more horrible.

Worst case, you may find that you have a different problem. If the
real goal is not self-improvement, but to halt criticism from others,
you need to improve that. A truly toxic person you may have to
distance oneself from. Likewise with a toxic peer group. This is one
reason your friends are so important. You have your choice of the
people you surround yourself with; make sure it's people who will
support your growth as a person.