---
title: Core Habits for Virtue Development: the Baha'i Model
---

# Core Habits for Virtue Development: the Baha'i Model

I follow a spiritual path, and readers of this blog have probably
figured out I'm a Baha'i. So it's not much of a surprise that I would
present how things are done in the Baha'i Faith. Rather than dwell
upon salesmanship, I'd prefer to outline the core habits for virtue
development as practiced. Then you can decide whether this model makes
sense for you or not.

To recap, the 4 core habits, as I wrote earlier, are the following:

1. Contemplation and thought
2. Self-reflection and self-analysis
3. Meditation
4. Prayer

Let's dive in and see how these elements are present in the Baha'i
model.

## Contemplation and Thought

This is an unfortunate name to give something. By this is meant a
certain kind of reflective learning. Sometimes this is done in a
reverential nature. But the core is to read from "wisdom literature"
(however you want to define it), and think deeply about
what you've read. And it needs to happen frequently enough that this
sort of stuff becomes part of your life - not just for a few moments
every weekend.

Well then, here we go:

   Recite ye the verses of God every morn and eventide.

This is a religious law, so indeed this has a devotional component to
it as well. "Read ye the sacred verses in such measure that ye be not
overcome by languor and despondency." By "the versus of God," in the
Baha'i Faith this is generally thought of as the versus of the central
texts of the revealed religions. At least to me, the import is to get
one to read and think about holy writings twice daily.

While "recite" implies that one might (in theory) read these without
understanding them, Baha'i culture places an emphasis on understanding
the Writings for oneselv, making that an unlikely interpretation.  The
Baha'i figure Abdu'l-Baha was particularly insistent that it is the
duty of every individual to independently investigate reality for
oneself, and key among these is making frequent reading of these
writings a habit.

## Self-Reflection and Self-Analysis

The following does not appear in the main corpus of Baha'i Laws, but I
believe it has an important application towards one's struggle to be
virtuous:

    O SON OF BEING!
    Bring thyself to account each day ere thou art
    summoned to a reckoning; for death, unheralded, shall come upon
    thee and thou shalt be called to give account for thy deeds.

As can be seen, the Godhead is rather uncompromising in such
situations. Having been given one life, it seems we are to make the
most of it. But for purposes of the habits, I'm going to focus on the
prhase "bring thyself to account each day."

It is not possible to grow in virtue without some sort of frequent
self-examination. Indeed, studies of habits have shown that some bad
habits can be reduced by simply counting the number of times one does
it and then reviewing it at the end of the day. By simply bringing
oneself an awareness of the problem and how frequently one does it, it
is possible to make it less of a habit and more of a conscious action,
and making it conscious allows you to break it - or substitute a
better habit for it.

So there are a number of ways to do this daily accounting - by
actually talling what one has done as suggested above, or by some sort
of end-of-day review of one's actions, or anything else. The key is to
force daily self-reflection and, one assumes, how one can do better
the next day.

One thing I have experimented with in the past is journaling, the
habit of writing one's thoughts at the end of the day. Note, however,
that the stream-of-consciousness writing of a typical "writer's
journal" is not what is meant here; instead, this is a means to force
a daily self-examination for purposes of becoming a better person. I
personally have found a blank journal ideal for focusing my thoughts;
I know if I try to do some daily review mentally without having a pen
in my hand, I have difficulty focusing on the task for more than one
or two minutes. Perhaps you are the sort that can do a mental review
without sitting down with pen and paper. But if you can't see yourself
doing this in a disciplined manner, a daily journal may be a good
place to start.

## Meditation

When discussing meditation, it is necessary to discuss what kind of
medidation. There is, commonly, the meditation-as-contemplation
definition of the word. That is usful and necessary, and indeed, I've
worked that into the first habit. What is meant here is the
meditation-as-mindfulness - that is, meditation as practiced in
classical Eastern traditions.

The Baha'i Faith doesn't assign any laws on meditations and makes no
mention of mantras. There is no emphasis on proper techniques for
"mindfulness," and aside from a handful of prayers that prescribe
positions, no advice on form of meditation is given. And yet, there is
this:

    It hath been ordained that every believer in God, 
    the Lord of Judgement, shall, each day, having washed 
    his hands and then his face, seat himself and, turning 
    unto God, repeat "Allah-u-Abha" ninety-five times.

Every Baha'i must do this once a day. It certainly looks like a way to
enter a meditative state for a short time.

Few Baha'is I know make the connection between this and mantras. This
may be because it only takes a few minutes to do. But this is no
different than Catholics who pray numerous repetitions of the rosary,
unaware that they are cultivating the same mental state as meditating
Buddhists. While no one could legitimately claim these are identical
experiences, they are still far more alike than different.

In any event, if you are developing your own habits, the takeaway is
that meditation can come in many forms and still be effective. It is
not necessary to purge it of meaning until nothing remains except a
clinical medical procedure.

## Prayer

Finally we have this. Perhaps with the exception of Buddhism, every
religion recommends prayer. In the Baha'i Faith, this comes in
distinct forms.

First, like Islam, there is an Obligatory Prayer. However, unlike
Islam, it is said under one of three different forms:

1. The Long Obligatory Prayer. This is a set prayer consisting of a
number of versus, with prescribed positions and prostrations. It takes
perhaps ten to fifteen minutes to perform. It is said once a day.

2. The Medium Obligatory Prayer. This is a prayer of about a dozen
versus, along with a few prescribed positions. It is said three times
a day: in morning, noon and evening.

3. The Short Obligatory Prayer. This is a short prayer of just three
sentences. It is said between noon and 4:00 PM.

Unusually, there is no guidance given whatsoever on which one to
choose. One is directed to simply pick one of the three.

What is the purpose of this prayer? Much like other modern religions,
the purpose is closeness to God. The prescribed versus have a number
of different themes, but the main theme is our insignificance relative
to the Godhead. Nowhere in the Baha'i Writings is it said that we are
to pray as a means for developing virtues! Yet, if one rules out any
sort of discussions of "spirit world," "mystic forces," and other
sorts of speculations, one is left with a practice that is intended to
remind us of our place in the world - as a rather small part that is
here to serve and assist others, not to glorify ourselves.

Aside from the obligatory prayer, there is no obligation to pray. My
experience with other Baha'is is that they do pray otherwise, but
generally read prayers extracted from Baha'i writings rather than make
ones up on the spot.


## So, How Do You Make These Habits a Habit?

So, let's look at this. Supposing someone resolved to improve their
own behavior to be a better person and more virtuous. What does the
above regimen give us?

- About 20-30 minutes out of every day
- Creates a number of good habits
- Ensures we focus on our goals for self-improvement repeatedly
throughout the day 

What we have here is a regimen which could serve as an analog for the
introductory physical workout. It's a prescribed course of action. It
requires a time committment but isn't too onerous. It should create an
immediate effect (if only by focusing ones thoughts on self-improvment
throughout the day). I think I've shown that these basic Baha'i
practices could form the foundation of an "initial workout" for virtue
development.

So then let's presume you've picked this up and you're convinced this
is the platform you can use to become a better person. I don't have to
convince you and you _want_ to do this. So, you're just going to do
it, right?

Right?

I suspect you'll have the same experience I've had. You start off with
good intentions, and then in spite of everything, you will drift
off. When you ask someone about it, they might mutter something about
willpower, and maybe tell you keep trying. Someone of even more
fanciful nature may even tell you your old self is "resisting"
corrections. In my most honest opinion - all are balony.

You are having trouble because you haven't made any of this a
*habit*. How do I know? Because that's the problem I had. If you want
to do the same thing every day you need to make it a habit. Anything
else is hoping you'll be on your best behavior every day. Yet you're
trying to be virtuous because you aren't on your best behavior every
day! So that obviously won't work.

So... how do you make it a habit?

Here's where I dig up Charles Duhigg's work. In his book on habits, he
notes that you need *three things* to make a habit:

1. A cue
2. The action
3. The reward

You already know what the action is. But you might not have a cue. And
you almost certainly haven't thought of the reward.

It's easier to think of this in terms of a bad habit. I'm going to
break it down by discussing a bad habit I used to have.

Several years ago I drove to work, and the gas station I frequented
was right across from a Dunkin Donuts. I think you know how this
goes. One day, when I was in a hurry, I crossed the street after
filling up and got donuts. Over time, every time I filled up, I'd hop
across the street to get two donuts and coffee. Then I started doing
it when I didn't need gas but wanted to "reward myself." Suddenly, I
was hitting it 2-3 times a week.

Let's see how this worked:

- The cue: initially the cue was "filling up my gas tank." Over time,
  the cue became "leaving my driveway to go to work."
- The action: pick up donuts and coffee
- The reward: eat donuts and coffee (donuts and coffee are its own
  reward, you see).

How did I break it? Well, I had a little help. I knew I wasn't going
to give it up completely. So I shifted my cue back to: "filling up my
gas tank ONLY." Meanwhile, I made sure I ate a bigger breakfast so I
didn't leave the house starving. But the main help I had came several
months later when my old car fell apart: my wife and I were fortunate
enough to get a Prius. Suddenly my weekly fill-ups were every other
week - and that was infrequent enough that I was then able to avoid
temptation most of the time.

Note that I didn't set out to do this, but once I started, it
developed a motion all its own. And to break that habit, I couldn't
just go cold-turkey - I had to modify both the reward and the
cue. Once I did that, I was able to cut out the action.

So while I've outlined a number of virtuous habits, I was really being
misleading. What I really outlined was a number of virtuous
_actions_. To make these habits of your own, you'll need a cue and a reward.

### The Reward

I know what you're thinking. "I know why I'm doing this, so I can be a
better person! Why do I need a reward? I'm not a five-year old kid who
has to be bribed!"

Unfortunately, habits don't work that way. When I talk about rewards,
I'm talking about tangible things that appeal to your lower nature, at
least in some respect. You, gentle reader, as virtuous as you wish to
be, will not initially be picking up these habits out of the rewards
you get initially. You have two choices:
- Figure a way to make the action itself rewarding, or
- Pick another small way to reward yourself after doing the action.

Sometimes the action itself is rewarding, depending on your
circumstances. For instance, as a Baha'i following these habits, I do
the midday prayer and meditations sometime in the early afternoon,
when I need a break. By around 3:00pm, I'm feeling stressed, and
stepping away from my activities really helps. So the activity is,
itself, its own reward. So I've never had a problem establishing this
as a habit.

From Monday through Friday.

On the weekends, however, I'm busy with the kids. This means no break
in my schedule, but on the other hand, none of the normal stress I
feel during the work week. The intrinsic reward is less - and I have
difficulty keeping the habit up.

Likewise, doing a morning reading has proven tough; I'm used to doing
reading or writing on the train and that would displace what would
otherwise be a good habit. And I've had trouble keeping on readings
and some sort of end-of-day journal for self-examination. So the
intrinsic rewards aren't enough?

How then to do this? The solution is to _bribe yourself_. Why?

Some activites don't have the immediate payoff that is necessary to
make them a habit. Indeed, the only reason I say the daily prayer
habitually is because I've done it over twenty years, and have learned
to enjoy it. Years prior to this, I was setting alarms and calendar
appointments to force myself to do it, because praying was not
something I did and it took me a very long time to enjoy it
intrinsically. If you're having trouble keeping on these habits, I
suspect that's the main reason.

Contrast that with the donut habit. My guess is it took me only a few
months from doing it occasionally to two or three times a week. Why?
BEAUSE IT'S DONUTS, MAN. I'm just glad it was a Dunkin Donuts shop,
and not a Krispy Kreme, or it would have become a daily habit that
would've require intense therapy and a prescription of
Chantix-for-Donuts to break. Bad
habits are easy to pick up because they're bad habits. Good habits -
like most virtues - require a while to appreciate, since the effects
are on a layer is not conducive to immediate gratification.

So one way to take care of this is to do reward bundling. The bribe is
something enjoyable that you tell yourself you're going to do after
you complete the activity. This is your reward. It has to be something
you enjoy, it can't be _too_ bad for you. You want to be able to drop
it after your habits are set and you've outgrown the need for it.

So for instance, suppose you are in the habit of plopping down on the
couch because you're just too frickin' tired to do anything in the
middle of the day. You want to set time aside to read some of these
"deep thought" writings every day, and go through a mental review of
what your progress is and how you can improve. Here's one example: if
you've wanted to "catch up" on a show you really like, tell yourself
that you're going to watch one episode after you do this study. Odds
are, you were going to do it anyway, but feel a little guilty about
it. Now you'll turn it into a reward for doing something good. And
by the time you get caught up on the series, you might be well into a
month performing this habit! Naturally, you could really do anything
else that you regard as a reward.

Also, if you have other good habits you want to start, you can do that
at the same time. For instance, there may be a certain habit you want
to do in the morning; e.g. wake up early. You could wake up early, do
the reading, and then do something as a small reward for keeping to
your new schedule.

### The Cue

A reward isn't all you need. To have a habit to do something, you need
a reminder. Something has to trigger your new habit. This trigger is
called a "cue."

In my bad habit, the cue was filling up my gas tank. Normally I didn't
pass directly by this Dunkin Donuts. Going one block out of my way was
all it took to get me thinking "well, while I'm here I might as
well..." For my noon prayer, my cue is (quite unfortunately) the
stressed feeling about two hours after lunch when I'm really tired
and need to push through two or three more hours of work.