---
title: Intermediate Exercises for Growing Virtue
category: article
---

# Intermediate Exercises for Growing Virtue

I've written prior about a suggested daily "workout" to help in your
effort to become a better person. I've focused on this because this is
something "positive" you can do. Positive actions are easier to make a
habit than "negative actions," where you try to avoid doing
something. The focus of the positive actions are to try to bring
awareness to actions that would otherwise be unconscious or habitual,
enabling you to improve those.

Likewise, if you want to work on anything as a New Year's resoltion,
it's good to "start off with a bang." By picking up a new daily
routine and committing to it, you will quickly build the momentum you
need to set on a path of self-improvement without overcommitting yourself.

The daily workout is drawn from the Baha'i Writings, but there are
many more things in the Baha'i Writings to cultivate virtue that are
not daily activities. These are less regular activities. Most of these
are obligations for Baha'is, but all of them have things to recommend
for anyone wanting to become a better person.

There is no system to this; so we'll cover these in no particular
order.

## The Fast

For many Baha'is, this has become, inadvertantly or not, the
touchstone of being a "real Baha'i." Once a year for 19 days (either
March 1-19 or March 2-20), all Baha'is undertake a fast. During that
time, there is no eating and drinking from sunrise until sunset during
that time. Like many laws in the Baha'i Faith, no justification for
this law is given; while some writings allude to this period of
self-discipline as having positive benefits for one's personal growth,
most do not.

As a religious institution, fasts are very common, though the form
varies. Some have theorized that the purpose is to ensure a community
remains tight-knit by excluding those who are unwilling to go through
such sacrifices. In a way, the sacrifice is so visible (to oneself)
that one feels as if he is not a "real Baha'i" if he is not practicing
the fast. I frequently catch colds during the fast, and when I do so,
I cannot participate in the fast. When this happens, I frequently feel
like I didn't "do the whole fast," in spite of the fact that the
writings forbid participation in the fast unless you are in health,
and that nobody really knows whether I'm practicing it or not.

As a growth experience though, it has an intuitive appeal. Much of
one's virtue requires self-restraint in a variety of forms;
particularly, through one's willpower or grit. Many psychologists have
studied this, and note that willpower is a bit like a muscle. A
taxing, stressful day tends to overuse one's willpower, which is why
that doughnut looks so good after a bad day at work. But conversely,
it can be exercised like a muscle, and over time it will grow. So it
makes sense that the fast could be seen as a sort of willpower growth
exercise. Were one to practice it too frequently, it would stress
one's willpower and deplete it for other things. But in intensity,
over a short stretch, it may serve for a small
permanent elevation.

As someone who has practiced it, I can say that _during_ the fact, it
does not help your willpower at all. And anyone who is hoping to use
it to lose a significant amount of weight may also be disappointed!

## Review of Expenditures

The Baha'i rules on tithing are not like any I've run into. In theory,
it is steep - 19%. But it does not become payable until a certain
amount has been accumlated in savings, and is only payable _after one
has deducted any necessary expenditures_. What is _necessary_? Well,
there are some guidelines - food, shelter, necessary furnishings for
the home, and expenses necessary for the maintenance of one's
profession are mentioned. But it essentially boils down to "whatever
you determine is a necessary expense." In practice, this means someone
may honestly pay ten percent, five percent, or even nothing.

Of course, for someone who isn't a Baha'i, they won't be doing
this. So why even bring this up?

Because this forces a habit of reviewing one's habitual
expenditures. This review is felt as being so important that Baha'is have
been told that setting up automatic bill-payments for tithing is not
possible. When someone becomes a Baha'i and gets serious about
applying this law, one quickly learns that the fastest way to deplete
one's savings is to rack up a lot of unnecessary expenses, not account
for them properly, and find you haven't properly accounted for
tithing. As a result, one quickly gets into the habit of thinking where
their money is going every month.

How does this help you cultivate virtues? Obviously, this is going to
directly assist with virtues such as prudence and thrift. But it is
also more far-reaching, in that one has to give thought to how one
spends one resources, and time. Some expenditures, quite bluntly, are
harmful. Without a review of one's expenses, it is far to easy to put
it on the card and forget about it.

## Study of "The Useful Arts"

Baha'is are urged to study "the useful arts." In the context of this
quote, it means anything that is beneficial to yourself or
mankind. The goal, therefore, is to spend time in education and
self-improvement.

In the context of "the useful arts," something specific was meant. In
the Persian culture in which the Baha'i Faith was founded, there were
a number of religiously-oriented pseudosciences that were posed as
serious issues of study. The founders of the Faith wanted to exclude
such fields from consideration, as "beginning with words and ending
with words"; the equivalent of arguments of how many angels can dance
on the head of a pin.

You can imagine what this really means. Studying for your profession
is useful. So is studying a useful field just out of
curiousity. Hopefully, reading this blog counts. Spending hours on
wikipedia seeing what the _Game of Thrones_ actors are doing? Probably not.

It is more or less a given in study of virtues that being well read
and exposing yourself to a lot of ideas are important.

## Personal Growth through Life Stages

On a larger scale, it is necessary to thing of personal growth as
growing through stages. As we meet challenges, we will (hopefully)
face these challenges and grow as people.

There are three life changes that are particularly important in the
life of an individual:

1. The First "Real Job"

2. Marriage

3. Children

It is notable that the Baha'i Faith has much to say about this. In
particular, all of these are seen as _normative_ for an
individual. That is, some sort of profession is _required_ for
Baha'is. Marriage is _recommended_ (but not obligatory). Once married,
having children is _recommended_ (adoptions is seen as an equally
valid alternative to actual childbirth).

One thing that has induced much worry is delay and foot-draging of
young adults as they put off these life stages. I'm not too eager to
draw generalizations about entire generations of youth. If you think
the problem is lack of character clutivation - whose fault is that?
Entirely the children's? I personally was quite lucky in being able to
get a college education and being inclined toward a profession that
pays well. I certainly wouldn't what to be in the position of a
hard-working twentysomething male who wasn't academically inclined and
who has trouble finding work in a chosen trade that pays well; even if
you have a job, finding marriage is increasingly difficult.

Be that as it may, there is much to be said for the expectation of
these life stages as recommended and necessary for personal
development and growth. It certainly beats the outlook young people
have, where all of these are viewed as "capstones," whereby * the
first "real" job is only considered valid in your targeted profession,
and * marriage is not to be attempted until one is professionally
established and * childbearing is not attempted until both parents are
at a suitable point in their profession and their material means.
This sort of attitude may be healthier than the attitude of earlier
working-class generations, whereby less-mature adults tried to hit
this "trifecta" by the age of 25. Still, the present situation,
whereby entire sections of society are considered "unmarriageable" and
childbearing is postponed so long as to cause many to unwillingly
forgo childbearing certainly has just as little to recommend to it.

The final life stage is preparing for death, and here again, the
Baha'i Faith recommends meeting this instead of postponing it. In
particular, everyone is required to have a will. While Baha'i law has
a (rather complicated) will for intestancy, Baha'is are required to
dedicate their own will, ensuring that this is only applied in unusual
circumstances.
