---
title: Interdictions: for the Virtue Killers
category: article
---

# Interdictions: for the Virtue Killers

I've written a series on techniques from the Baha'i Faith on how one
improves virtue. I've shied away from some of what are known as the
"Baha'i Laws." This is on purpose; one can be a rigorous adherent of
various prohibitions and the like, yet still be a rotton person if one
doesn't keep to one's daily habits and approaches them with the
improper attitude. But this column discusses some of the prohibitions,
along with the background to understand why they are necessary.

As one works on self improvement, one is normally going to find a
number of things that one has to "give up." Sometimes, the only
reasonable way to improve in some way is to give up something - for
instance, if your self-improvement goals include a healthy diet, this
may mean a number of things. You might give up your breakfast
doughnut, any mid-afternoon snack you habitually have, and a few other
indulgences.

Normally it is simply desireable to moderate things. Most things are
morally neutral. Saturated fat may be bad for your heart, but having a
steak every once in a while is fine. And even if that bothers you
because you are vegetarian, and you believe it would be better for the
world that everyone is vegetarian, you have to admit that the
difference between going all vegetarian and cutting out 95% of your
meat intake is negligible, for both your health and the planet's. It
is rare that you have to give up something completely for your efforts
to do any good.

Yet you may come to the point that you need to to set interdictions
for yourelf. That is, you've decide certain things are so bad for your
character, or so easy to turn into bad habits, that you decide you can
no longer improve while indulging in them _even in moderation_. These
may be things that are so antithetical to what you are attempting to
accomplish that it no longer makes sense to even consider it.  A
brief, amusing example. My wife joined weight-watchers some time back;
it uses a "points" system, where you count points instead of calories.
Fruits and vegetables are zero points - to encourage people to eat
those. On the other hand, there is one particular common food for
which they give no points - ice cream! Their position is it has
"infinite" points; you are never allowed to eat it, because there are
always healthier alternatives. Eating ice cream is considered so
antithetical to the goal of weight control that it is not
allowed. Fortunately, I am not on weight watchers.

In much the same way, you will have interdictions on things that are
just directly opposed to your development of a person.  Then there are
things that in themselves may not be directly opposed to your goals,
but interfere with achieving them in other ways. For instance, in my
twenties I knew people who have tried to cut back on alcohol, and to
assist themselves in that goal, have actually made the decision to stop
socializing with certain friends. Why? Because hanging out with
those friends always resulted in a night of alcohol-fueled
stupidity. Or supposing you have decided you want to improve your
mood. You may give up alcohol if drinking makes you depressed. Or you
may give up ice cream if your depression triggers a binge-eating ice
cream episode, leading to more depression.

So it's pretty common to set interdictions for oneself.

Now this isn't necessarily where you _start_, is it? Supposing one
resolves to become more courageous, for instance. You're going to come
up with a list of things to do to improve courage... say, maybe a)
take one new risk a day; b) pick up a hobby that will increase
exposure to something you'd normally be afraid of doing; c) maybe get
a little therapy to help; and so on. You aren't going to pick up a
list of things *not* to do. That seems entirely besides the point.
Now suppose you actually wanted to "give up something," i.e. smoking,
you aren't going to be successful by focusing on not doing that.
Instead, psychologists say it is more effective is to pick up an
alternate habit and stick with it. To give up smoking, for instance,
people are told to get a different habit that will let them get out
and socialize, to replace the ritual break they get from smoking.

So what I'm saying is that while interdictions are frequently
necessary for one's personal growth, it is insufficient and may be
unnecessary.

Instead, I believe one should consider interdiction to be an advanced
technique. To place them in their proper context, let's review some of
the techniques for building habits and virtues. To better oneself, one
would normally do things in this manner:

* First, you pick up an initial regimen for self improvement. You
  apply it and start to notice it working. The original blog post
  outlining the four core practices is one such regime.

* As you proceed, you increase the difficulty. You begin noticing your
  weak points and focusing on those. You start to find certain
  roadblocks.

* After a while, you notice that there are certain roadblocks to
  self-improvement that keep coming up; bad habits that keep
  repeating. Say, too much time on Facebook, too much TV, too many
  trips to the coffeeshop whatever. You then decide that you must give
  those up - set an **interdiction** on yourself. This is something
  you will no longer do; you are becoming a person who simply does not
  do those things and does not enjoy them.

So the interdiction is generally the last thing you do - although you
may have a suspicion that your goals require you to give up something
from the offset.

And yet...

... when people thing of religions, what do they think of? The
interdictions!

## Suggestions on Some Interdictions

It should be evident based on the order in which I've been discussing
things that the most important part of the Baha'i moral code are what
I'd call the "positive" the teachings; that is, the things you do that
make you a better person.  So why does the Baha'i Faith even have
interdictions, and the associated "Thou-shalt-not"s? For the same
reason you yourself might invent interdictions - because they
interfere with your goals. Religions, as a whole, have their goal in
the betterment of one's virtues; it would stand to reason that there
are certain things that are troublesome enough, given the matrix of
the culture within which it was revealed, that certain interdictions
were introduced. To my mind, they are not as powerful as the positive
teachings, and have changed over the course of time. But they remain
hazardous to ignore. They are the ice cream for your diet - things so
antithetical that it is pointless to indulge in.

The Baha'i Faith has a number of interdictions. These interdictions
are themselves framed as "a protection" for those practicing
them. Personlly, I find it the only reasonable way to frame it, and
I've been uncomfortable when others frame it in any other way. For
some people, on the other hand, it seems to be the core of their moral
code. I'm not sure what the reason is for that attitude; I've seen it
among Baha'is and it certainly isn't unique to any one religion. It
could be that some people think virtue is to be attained solely on the
basis of avoiding certain things. I admit it may hold an appeal for
someone with a lot of self-restraint who might otherwise wish to do a
bare minimum for their own personal growth. My opinion is focus on the
interdictions without a focus on the positive teachings or why the
interdictions are in place loses the entire reason for their
existence. I tend to agree with the writings of a certain Jewish
carpenter who had some strong feelings about people who practice
strict religious law without any adherence to the spirit of the law.

But this is an aside. Another way to understand this was stated by a
friend who was completely irreligious and made a point about Baha'i
Law that I remember to this day. Having been about Baha'i about a
year, I told a mutual acquaintance that I could not drink beer, and
when pressed, I said it was due to a religious law. My friend said
something to the effect "No, you are _choosing_ to follow that law,
you could break it if you wanted to." And indeed I have not, at least
not intentionally (1).

So with that, I would like to _suggest_ certain interdictions that can
be adopted to help with one's path to improved virtues - whatever the
specific virtue. These are the "thou shalt nots..." that have helped give
religious thought a bad rap, but given the good they do, it would be
irresponsible not to mention them.

The Baha'i Faith interdicts many activites. I'm just going to
list the most notable and unusual for the western (American) cluture.
These are some of the onces that have provided me, personally, the
most benefit in my own growth. As for you, who is almost certainly not
a Baha'i - consider it part of your "advanced" workout routine. Your
challenge, should you accept it, is to refrain from the following
activities:

1. The consumption of addictive or habit-forming substances that impair mental
function (including alcohol, but NOT including tobacco/nicotine and caffeine)

2. Extramarital sexual activity

3. Gambling

4. Backbiting and gossip

5. Participation in partisan political activities

Now the Baha'i Faith actuall interdicts many others. There are dozens
listed in the primary repository of "Baha'i Law," a tome called the
Kitab-i-Aqdas (literally: "The Most Holy Book"). The bulk of the
remaining interdictions are either obvious (e.g. killing, calumny) or
less germane to the sort of "educated
Westerns" that are likely to be reading this, things like ascetism,
mendicancy, kissing of hands to show obesiance, plurality of wives,
etc. Such laws and commentary blows the main text of the
Kitab-i-Aqdas out to 190 paragraphs of text. In spite of the central
nature of the Kitab-i-Aqdas in the Baha'i Faith, that book does not convey
the flavor of the movement in the least.

In any event, all five of these interdictions deserve their own
consideration. But to write at length on any one of these topics would
lose the focus, which is to develop one's virtues. While I have my own
personal reasons for believing these are all useful for one's
development, it would be self-indulgent to spend time attempting to
prove these to others, scientifically or not, unless I can present it
in a way that helps one reach their goals, without interpreting it in
"innovative" ways. I'll leave it to you to consider.

(1) Although to be technical, I imbibed accidentally a
few months ago. My wife bought a badly-labeled craft root beer for me,
unaware it had alcohol in it; I knew on the first swig that it had
alcohol - quite a bit. Fortunately, one gulp wasn't enough to do
anything to me.)