---
title: Keystone Habits for Virtue Improvement
category: article
---

# The Keystone Habits of Virtue Improvement

Who among us doesn't want to be a better person?

As I'm writing this, the New Year's has passed some three weeks
ago. That means resolutions. That means in the weeks before, there
will be a spate of articles in papers of record and glossy magazines
about how to make your resolutions stick. In the first weeks, many
will make resolutions and attempt to stick to them. Vegetables will be
purchased, gymns will be joined, people will put "swear jars" on their
desks. Office workers will go to work earlier, and leave earlier to be
with their families. And if you're a regular gym rat, you'll noticed
that the gym floor and aerobics classes are suddenly overflowing.

Those are the just the resolutions we can see. Then there are various other
resolutions people have - the one that are really difficult to work
on. People telling themselves they'll be kind, or that they'll keep
their temper in check. Married men or women who tell themselves they'll improve
attention to their partner. While not visible to us, these are serious
struggles as well. If anything, this is even more salutory. And in
theory, these don't require large committments in time or weird
dietary changes.

And what will happen as a result of these resoltuion?

The only one I know about firsthand is gym
attendance, as an irregular gym rat. I usually attend a gym close to
work, and I dread the coming of January. By the second week, the
locker room is twice as full, the floor hardly has any room, the
classes are overflowing. But I've learned over the years that by
mid-February, things will be back to the way they were.

The irony is that resolving to adopt a regular workout routine is
probably the most easy resolution to pull off. That is, if you've made
proper plans. You create a workout schedule schedule, and (important!)
drop things from your schedule that would compete with this. If your
slogan for success is "just do it," then here you go - this is one
where you really can "just do it." Yet the attendance trends tell the
truth - most of these resolutions won't work out. Even for those who
aren't already overscheduled.

So much for resolutions where the efforts are visible. What about the
efforts to become a better person? To improve one's relationships? To
be kinder, or more assertive, or reach out more often? Aren't these
even more important? Unfortunately, you can't to go the gym to work on
those. Instead, the plan most people have is _try_. Try to be
better. Try to be more honest. Try.

What are the odds that's going to work out?

If the only plan you have is to _try harder_, that isn't a plan. Here
is the first time (and hopefully the last) where I quote from Star
Wars:

	"Do, or do not. There is no try."   -- Yoda

Without a plan, your resolution will be forgotten as quickly as a you
forget an uplifting epigram from a fortune cookie. It will last as
long. And unlike the resolution, you won't feel guilty when you
realize what your fortune cooke said.

No, the problem is you don't have a plan. _Try_ is not a plan. Aren't
there plans for these things?

## Improvement of Virtue

Supposing someone has a resolution like so:

"I will try to be a better person this year."
  
Someone may quibble and say that's too broad, , but the impulse is
basically a good one. It should be possible to help oneself get better
overall, even if just a little. The problem may be that this is
imprecise. Is there a more precise way of stating this? After all,
"better" could mean virtually anything, depending on your values system.

But when someone says they want to be a better person, it usually means
one wishes to be more *virtuous*. This is a little better, in fact,
because it has a broad connotation that is generally understood:

"I will try to be a more virtuous person this year."

Virtue has a somewhat religious connotation, and is frequently bound
up with such ideas as spirituality, holiness, purity, belief and such
things. In many cases, virtuous conduct is seen as being synonymous
with ethical behavior. All of these may be true. But when someone says
they want to "be a better person," they usually aren't thinking of
that.

Instead, they're thinking about a specific character strength or
virtue that they wish to exhibit better. One can certainly become more
kind, loyal, forgiving; less wrathful, stressed-out or jealous, right?
Without picking up a lot of religious doctrine to go with that.
All of these it should be possible to improve, without veering into
usch discussons.

Yet, if you Google "virtue," most of the conversations are dominated
by religious discussions. Assertions of the true believers aside, this
seems like no way to help someone. If someone who wants to be more
forgiving, the effort should be on improving that - not on telling
them they need to "bring Christ into their life" or "get in touch with
their fifth chakra." And people who seem to enjoy giving out advice
like that should know that not only is such advice not actionable, it
seems aimed at helping you with your problem rather than helping
others with their problem. The same goes for certain sorts of
psychologists who, given any problem, will instead spend a year
discussing your family history in therapy instead. Spiritual paths,
"spirit guides," therapists; all can be helpful. But that alone won't
pass for a plan, and it confuses the means with the aim.

Fortunately, there are those who have written about virtue, and how to
improve it, without bringing in any particular path.

Aristotle may not have invented the concept of virtue, nor perfected
its definition. But in his great work _Nicomanchean Ethics_, he has
given one of the most useful conceptualizations of virtue. I find it
particularly useful exactly because it is untethered from any
particular spiritual tradition.

One important principle is that he conceives as goodness in
general as also being moral goodnes and idential to wisdom:

   ... virtue is not merely a state in conformity with the right
   principle, but one that implies the right principle; and the
   right principle in moral conduct is prudence.

In other words, goodness in a person _is_ virtue. Aristotle defines
this virtue as being the prudent golden mean between two
extremes. While one may agree with his definition or disagree, this
ideal of good conduct and virtuous conduct would ring true for anyone
wishing for self-improvement.

But what distinguishes someone who is virtuous? It is the person's
habits. A virtuous person is one of whose habits are of a virtuous
nature:

   Excellence is an art won by training and habituation. We do not act
   rightly because we have virtue or excellence, but we rather have
   those because we have acted rightly. We are what we repeatedly do.
   Excellence, then, is not an act but a habit.

Want to be a "better person"? It requires acquiring the habits of a
"better person"!

Easy, right?

You may suspect I'm sarcastic. Everyone knows habits are hard to
change. Everyone knows someone who has been trying to give up
cigarettes, or trying give up a Ben & Jerry's habit, or trying to cut
back on time on Facebook. Habit changing is hard. But at least it can
be done. Look at the two resolutions below, and see which one is better:

  "I will try to keep my temper in check and swear less."

  "I will develop the habits necessary to keep my temper in check."

The first one has a weasel word - "try". It will not succeed; you
can't measure a "try." And you can easily convince yourself "well, at
least I tried." Worse that, if that's all you do, and you really did
feel like you tried, you might even consider this a fixed,
unchangeable part of your personality after a few lame attempts.

But consider the other one. The second one is more likely to result in
a substantial change.

Unfortunately, it is going to require a lot more work.

At this point, you may think: why does it need to be a habit? Can't it
just be a case of being more mindful and not acting automatically?
Isn't it just a case of more resolve and willpower? A habit implies an
unthinking reaction, right?

This is a tempting thought - that this is really just about
willpower. All of us like the idea that we have "free will." This is
the underlying appeal of those who think this is just a case of
"trying harder." If you have a bad habit, breaking it is just a case
of stopping the bad habit, thinking about the situation, and choosing
to do something else.

Unfortunately, if that is your attitude, you have lost the
battle. Like it or not, the bulk of actions that all of us take in the
data are habitual and done without thinking. Indeed, if it weren't for
habits done without thought, we would be so overwhelmed we wouldn't be
able to get the door out the morning. You rely on habits for an
enormous repertoire of behavior. The idea that you will be able to
catch your bad habits and stop them would require slowing down you
pace of decision unthinkably. Worse yet, you make most of your
decisions _before you even become aware that you have made
them_. Meaning that becoming a better person through sheer effort and
deliberation requires not only slowing down time, but reversing it!

If you want to be a better person, forming good habits is the only way
you are going to do it, difficult as it is. And indeed, I suspect this
is one reason Aristotle's virtue ethics is making a comeback. It isn't
because everyone agrees with the framework. It's more likely the fact
that ethics has been viewed as a problem of proper decision-making for
a very long time. And most ethical decisions are made on-the-fly,
without thinking! If you want to become more ethical by studying
ethics and reading books and thinking more carefully about big
decisions, you are going to miss 95% of the ethical decisions you make
on a daily basis - because they are all made based on habits you have
without even realizing them!

So hopefully I've impressed upon you that becoming a better person
requires creating habits in you that will make you be have better -
and those habits are what make you a better person.

So what does it take to form a habit?

## Underlying Habits of Virtue

Let's make it a little easier. Suppose you want to be a better person,
and you have a specific behavior in mind. This is a bit more ideal.

One reason people don't like the idea of habits is that breaking bad
habits and creating good habits is hard. However, doing so is
possible, and even more fortunately, the process has been studied very
well. Psychologically, we know much more about habit
formation. To this end, I am heavily referencing Charles Duhigg's _The
Power of Habit: How We Do What We Do in Life and Business_. I highly
recommend this book.

Of course, knowing how to create a habit is nothing if you don't know
what good habit you need to create! That is half the battle.

For this, I'm going to borrow an idea from business literature. It has
to deal with goal-setting. I'll skip over the background and just dive
straight in. To be achievable, a goal should be SMART:

  Specific
  Measureable
  Achievable
  Realistic
  Time-oriented

This is intended for goals, not habits. But it is possible to use them
on habits that you choose to adopt.

So supposing you want to be a better person. Per SMART, as a habit,
that isn't going to work. In what way do you want to become better?

Let's take one from my life. Here is one I'm presently working
on. I'll start with a vague longing of the person I'd like to be at
work:

"I would like to be much more agreeable and easy to approach; I would
like to avoid being seen in a bad mood."

This is all well and good, but it is not specific enough to work
on. To be effective, we need to pick one bad habit we have that fits
into this framework, and replace it with a good habit. Bad habits are
never eliminated, just replaced with good habits. So what are specific
things to work on from the above? For me personally, it means
 * smiling more often
 * not acting so intense
 * not swearing under my breath at the computer
 * be more available to others and more proactively helpful

There's too much to unpack here to be useful. Probably, all of them
are worth doing. Rather than doing all of them at once, it would be
better if I handled one thing at a time. Let's do this:

 * not swearing under my breath at the computer

I'm a software developer, so this sort of comes with the
territory. But it's disruptive and offputting to some, so here
goes. We need to start replacing it:

 * When stressed at work, I will disengage from whatever I'm doing

Well, that's better. Sort of. It could be a bit more concrete.

 * When I feel like swearing, I will squeeze a stress ball at my desk.

Already, this is a little better. It's specific and achievable. This
may be as good as I want. If this proves a tough habit to break,
perhaps we can make it measurable and start ratcheting it down.

In the case of a bad habit, it is often recommended to start by simply
noting how often you perform the habit. That brings your awareness to
the habit. So for instance, in this case, I could just put tick marks
on a post-it. Supposing, then, that I found out I'm averaging 30 such
incidents a day. I can set goals based on that - for instance "I will
swear no more than 3 times a day by the end of this month." Now you
have a new habit, along with the SMART criteria to go with it.

There is plenty of other guidance on making your habits
stick. However, I would next like to discuss certain habits that from
a the point of view of developing virtues, are very special.

## The Keystone Habits of Virtue

Charles Duhigg's _The Power of Habits_ notes that not all habits are
equal in terms of impact. He notes that many businesses have
particular habits called "Keystone Habits." These are good habits
enforced throughout the company - habits so good that they
dramatically improve the conduct of business and themselves make it
easy to adopt other habits.

Given all that has been written about virtue, one would think that
there are keystone habits for becoming a better person. And that would
be correct!

Let's set-aside the advice of self-help books; there isn't a lot of
uniformity there. You have your choice of mostly unscientific
pop-psychology, or the heavy, rigorous-sounding scientific books I
favor. Unfortunately the scientific books don't give a lot of concrete
takeaways.

But virtue has been concern at least since Aristotle wrote about it -
certainly even longer. there is an enormous amount of advice in wisdom
literature on the clutivation of virtue. And certain habits come up
again and again in the literature.

1. Contemplation and Thought
2. Self-Examination and Reflection
3. Meditation
4. Prayer

Let's take a look at some of these, in turn. The distinctions may seem
a bit fuzzy, but if you look at exactly what the great thinkers and
teachers recommended, it is quite clear.

### Contemplation and Thought

How does one even know what the virtues mean? How does it relate to
your life? What does it mean to be "good"? These are the sorts of
questions one must think about with respect to self-improvement. The
great philosophers spent much of their time, well, in
thought. Likewise, great spiritual leaders set aside much time for
thought and contemplation, not just prayer.

However, the idea of spending time in "contemplation and thought" is too often
confused with undirected naval-gazing and rumination. Likewise, the term
"philosophizing" is frequently confused with verbal jousting and
sophistry; in many cases, a desire to obscure the truth instead of
search for the truth. Obviously, these things are not going to help
you become a better person. What then, is meant, by these things?





Obviously, then, this is a type of directed thought based on knowledge
and study - but not of the immediately practical sort. If I walk you
through a step-by-step guide to arc welding as shown in a YouTube
video, you are going to spend a great deal of time in thought and
contemplation ("What was that thing back there in step 11? Where am I
going to get this equipment? Don't I need a license for this, is it
even legal?") This sort of contemplation is necessary if you want to
keep your limbs attached to your body, but it is not going to assist
you in your personal path to growth.

This sort of thought is acheived by reading what the great thinkers
have thought, actually thinking deeply about it, doing it on a regular
basis, and in some cases discussing this with others and testing what
we know through a common search for truth.

### Self-reflection and self-analysis



    The unexamined life is not worth living -- Socrates (via Plato)

This quote, actually, is not about self-reflection, much as it would
sound like. This quote, attributed to Socrates by Plato, was spoken
during the final trial of Socrates. In saying it, Socrates chose to
die rather than take exile, as exile would have interfered with his
search for the truth.

But let's not let the facts get in the way of a good story. It sounds
like a call to examine one's own life, and there are
lots of other recommendations for self-reflection and reflecting on
one's actions. Also, while we're at it, the statement of the Oracle at
Delphi, which Socrates had said triggered his search for truth, was

    Know thyself.

Plainly, if you wish to better yourself, you will need to gain a lot
of self knowledge. You will need to identify your bad habits. You will
need to identify what triggers those bad habits. You will need to
understand your strengths and how to leverage them. You may need to
understand certain subconscious motivations for why you do what you
do.

Indeed, underlying the whole field of psychotherapy is the
premise that if you better know yourself, you will be able to solve
your problems and bad behaviors. And if you are a big believer in
science, then you hopefully know it is effective. Some moreso than
others; in general, the most effective fields, such as "rational
emotive theorapy," work by deliberately probing what your beliefs and
behaviors are.

So since acquiring virtue is, to some extent, a process of "fixing
yourself," you will have to examine yourself to see what is broken. In
the Baha'i Faith, this is seen as uncovering "the gems within." A
therapist is not needed for this, though if you have serious problems
it is recommended.

So how does one gain self-knowledge? Well, I suppose you could dwell
and ruminate on your own faults, but that can quickly become
counterproductive. You will need somme sort of method, but really any
method will do. One of the oldest means of self reflection is to keep
a diary or journal. This is an old practice that is frequently
recommended in wisdom literature. There is something about the process
of writing out one's thoughts that lead towards a deeper
understanding. I know from my own experiences. Once on paper, I'm able
to gain a perspective on my problems and thoughts. Many problems I
ruminated excessively on seem small and inappropriate of deep thought
once I read it back from the journal. Others which I mention in
passing I later read, after reading, are more important.

There are some things, such as serious addiction
problems and psychological problems, that may will not be able to
handle by yourself with reflection. Some of these may be caused by
underlying diseases. So do not take this article as saying in any way
that psychotherapy is unnecessary.


### Meditation

Apparently mindfulness(TM) is all the trend nowadays. This irks me a
little - I've been doing meditation for years and now, suddenly they
call it "mindfulness." I suppose I shouldn't be too curmudgeonly, but
it seems like a rebranding undertaken by MBAs in Marketing where they
attempt to hide the obvious 
religious background of meditation in order to sell mindfulness
pillows and mindfulness mats and mindfulness apps and mindfulness
courses. If you have meditated before, you are no doubt aware that
the physical props and requirements to properly meditation are
gloriously lacking.

But the word mindfulness(TM) as a marketing term is useful, in that it
means a specific sort of process. In particular, it is a reinvention
of the Transcendental Meditation that became popular in the 1970s,
after being discovered in the west as a critical element of Buddhist
practice. Western religions of course, have their own spiritual
traditions of meditation - or as one Baha'i told me "In prayer you
might talk to God, but in meditation God talks to you!"

But I have to disagree slightly with my Baha'i friend - my
understanding of mindfulness, and the spiritual practices it is pulled
from, means something different and distinct. Mindfulness means a
distinct process, of emptying one's thoughts - generally so that
unhealthy ones can leave. In secular practices, this can involve
relief from anxiety, irrational thoughts, or anger. Outside of that,
it can be used to cultivate positive thoughts.



### Prayer

Finally, we have prayer. This is the heavy lifter of the Occidental
religions. The great mystics and leaders of the Christian church wrote
much of this and the wisdom they got through - Theresa of Avila,
Francis of Assisi, Thomas Merton.

Unfortunately prayer has suffered in the popular religion of the
west. From childhood, most of us are taught - even encouraged - to
pray for things. This is, unfortunately, a reflection of what popular
culture things prayer is supposed to be. In the movies and television,
if anyone prays, it's for stuff. When it isn't for stuff, it's shown
as a shorthand for a brittle, hidebound conservatism - say, a elderly matron
constantly praying the rosary as a plot device to signal hypocracy.
Cultural studies and education is no better; when we are taught about
ancient pagan religions, we are taught about things like sacrifice and
ritual and the prayers that accompanied them. Why did they do this? To
pray for things and please the Gods. In popular notions, there is no
different than the prayer uttered by an ancient tribesman for a good
harvest than the prayers of modern mystics.

This is a grave misunderstanding that both robs prayer of its meaning
and its ability to actually help you. Prayer, as understood by the
mystics, is nothing more and nothing less than "communion with God"; a
way of bringing yourself into the presence of the divine, whatever it
may actually be.

To some extent, this habit is the most tricky for those who are
completely atheistic or who have decided that any sort of belief
system not based in science is not worht exploring. The idea of being
in touch with some untouchable entity out there seems as ridiculous,
and attempting to "pretend" by adopting a habit of prayer seems as
ridiculous as dressing up like a Jedi just so one can be in touch with
The Force. So I'm not going to force-fit this on anyone resistant.

However, for those of you who do believe, there is much pragmatic
advice from the great spiritual leaders. And much of it has to do with
how you pray.

In the Baha'i Faith, the common practice is to actually _not_ use
their own prayers. Rather, they use the prayers written by the
founders of the Baha'i Faith. These prayers, are rarely prayers _for_
something, but when they are, they are for things such as virtues
(frequently referred to in their writings as "spiritual
qualities"). Indeed, The Lord's Prayer is itself a prayer for such
things; it certainly isn't a prayer for victory and wealth. And if you
trust biblical scholars on the history of the text in The Bible (I
do), then given what we know, it's one of the few passages such
scholars express high confidence that Jesus really said himself. It's
that important.

So my recommendation is that if you wish to use prayer for self
improvement, but "praying from the heart" is coming up empty for you,
then stop doing that. Use the prayers of others after carefully
examining them. Start being instrumental and pick writings that will
improve you and strengthing you, not something that will dull you with
its self-indulgence. Once this is done, praying on a daily basis will
even seem helpful instead of weird.

## Wrapping It Up

So forgive me for the length. To restate the core premise of this
post:

   A good person is someone with good habits. We call these good
   habits "virtues." Virtues are things one does without much
   conscious thought that leads one to be a better person.

To develop specific virtues requires specific habits. But there are
four keystone habits that have been identified in wisdom literature as
important for self-development:
   * Contemplation and thought
   * Self-reflection (self-analysis)
   * Meditation
   * Prayer

Seems like a lot right? Well, given a proper set of habits, it isn't
much trouble at all, and the benefits exceed whatever else you could
be doing with the time. Next, I'll discuss something one faith
tradition does that hits all these habits!