---
title: Why Dating Advice Is Oh So Horrible
category: cutting-floor
---
## About Bad Advice
# And Why Dating Advice - Columns and Elsewhere - Are Oh So Horrible

It is a truism that one should be wary of unsolicited advice.

This goes doubly so for dating, courtship, and "pairing
off"... perhaps the only area, aside from finance, where you find
loads of people giving out free advice - strangers, relatives, friends...
_anyone_.

You'd think dispassionate advice in dating would be much easier to
come by. Why wouldn't your friends and relatives offering advice want you to be
successful and happy? Why would the authors of advice columns and
self-help books dole out ineffective or harmful advice, rather than
helpful things which, we presume, would lead to repeat business and
word-of-mouth? Unfortunately, even though intentions may be pure in
some cases, the effect is nearly as bad. 

I say that as someone who married in my late thirties in spite of my
best efforts. I took a lot of advice, and learned the hard way most of
it was bad - even selfish in some cases. Yet there wouldn't seem to be
any incentive for doling out bad advice. Why would bad advice be so
common? Well, I learned a bit about things, and I think by now I can
at least give my own unsolicited advice, to save others from
unhappiness. Partly I'm
writing about this to vent after years of perspective, but mainly to
warn others not to make the same unwise, stupid mistakes I
did.

There are people for whom romance comes easily - this column is not
for them. It is for those for whom it is a tough problem, those who
frequently become the recipients of advice. The hint of desperation in
the search leads such people to act on unwise advice suggesting they
do rash or offensive things.  While those offering advice may believe
they are recommending the best, sometimes they unconsciously,
unwittingly serve their own agendas.

In many cases, what sounds like reasonable advice instead says more
about the person giving it. For instance, a friend of you may goad you
into being more "assertive" (translation: rude), just to shake things
up. Or a different friend, upon hearing you're thinking of moving,
will tell you the problem is all in your head and that you'd be much
happier staying put. Perhaps a platonic friend who is tired of having
so many members of your gender hitting on her advises you that
everyone would be better off and happier if they stoped pushing for
romantic relationships. A psychologist whose worldview is stuck in the
sixties tells you to start sleeping around casually because it's "good
for you." Acting on this advice may make your friends happy without
doing a bit of good for you.

But these are people you know, and if you have good friends you'll
know how to take the advice. The main problem is those posing as
experts that you don't know. In particular, advice columns, self-help
books, and "counselors."

Let's start with the worst source of advice: advice columns in
magazines. The less said about them the better. They are there to help
seel the makeup, clothes and accessories of the magazines they
advertise in. If they make you feel inadequate and self-conscious,
then mission accomplished.

For self-help books, some of them will give solid advice, but none of
them really express ideas that require a full-length book - in many
cases, Amazon reviews give you an adequate synopsis. Unfortunately,
the people who write the book-jacket blurbs are well aware of this,
which is why they put such a hard sell on how much the book will help,
but only if you buy the book and read it will you derive the full benefits.

One would think *science* would be of help, right? And many of these
self-help books rely on "science." Unfortunately, hard science in this area
is still basically descriptive (what things are), not prescriptive
(what to do). Prescriptive advice is mostly pseudoscientific
nature. An author with "degrees in the school of 'hard knocks'" isn't
relying on science, and these are the people who write the self-help
books that promise to magically fix your love life.

Self-help books on dating are mostly geared towards young, eager
women. Women are much more inclined to read and much more inclined to
work on themselves and pay attention to relationships; hence, much
more inclined to buy books. However, this happens to men, in a very
strange, under-the-radar way. A lot of guys put far to much stock in a
pseudoscience called "Evolutionariy Psychology"; I was one of them for
about a year or two, until I figured out that much of this was not
science, but simply scientific-sounding self-help pitched at desparate
single men eager to change their luck.

This gets into the worst: the consultants. Particularly those
connected to "evolutionary psychology." It started in the nineties;
for all I know, it continues to this day. Back then, someone who was
nothing more than a glorified social worker could hang their shingle
as a "dating consultant," and charge men over a hundred dollars a
session in dating deserts like Austin, Seattle and San Jose. These
places are packed to the gills with successful, awkward men, rattled
by multi-year dry spells in dating, looking for any sort of answer as
to why they were so "broken." Unfortunately, a little perspective
could had led such men to realize that most of their problems could be
fixed with a U-Haul or a one-way ticket to someplace, *anyplace*,
other than the high-tech cities where well-paid men of all sorts
vastly outnumber the young educated women they would normally couple
with.

Worst of all is the coated-with-sleaze scene of the "Pick up Artist."
This has been written about numerous places; I'm not sure whether the
goal is to assist men with their dating lives or lash out by making
single women miserable. In any case, it seems to have some
statistically insignificant improvement on former cause while making
far more of a contribution toward the latter. Here again, horrible
advice is being given out by people who doesn't have the best interest
of others in heart, growing a thriving grift at the the modest cost of
making the world a little worse each day. You may wonder why this
isn't self-evident to the people who are suckered into this scene. The
fact remains, people may say they are not looking for authority, but
that is exactly what people start looking for when they are very
frustrated with what is really a very basic need.

For women and men, there is one thing that can help, and here I
unfortunately speak from experience. If you are having problems in
this area, you should seriously consider a qualified psychologist for
a while, if you have the means. However, you have to be picky; you may
need to go through two or three. The best ones will be up front about
the fact that this can be a difficult problem for even those with the
best personalities. A psychologist can work with you only _if_ you
have romantic potential on some level - that is, for them to help you,
you need to be basically attractive and have opportunities to ask out
or be asked out on dates. The best psychologists will focus on things
you can control, working on improving your personality and actions,
which will make it more likely you can succeed. But will not guarantee
success. If you are a basically attractive person in a "dating
desert," they cannot help. Worse yet, they may not realize they cannot
help, and may in fact suspect you are "resisting treatment."

-------------------------------------------

Finally, when you are reading self-help books, there are some advice
that is good, but is not good for *you*. That is, it is misapplied in
your case. If advice does not work for you, it is possible you are
taking advice meant for someone in a different situation dealing with
a very different sort of problem.

Why is that? And how do you avoid it?

Let's divide the world of singles, roughly speaking, into three
groups. The group you are in will roughly determine how successful you
are. It also determines the kind of advice you should listen to.

ALPHAS: You are attractive to potential mates. Many would be
interested in you. NOTE: if you get lots of interest but you
aren't interested back, you are still an alpha. I didn't say you
could get _anyone you want_.

BETAS: You are not unattractive. Many would not be interested in
dating you, but some are.

GAMMAS: You have issues, physical or psychological, that keep you from
being seen as attractive.

Most of the advice written in self-help books is for the "alpha"
women. That is because there are a lot of book readers that fall into
this category, and they have enough romantic options that when the
listen to advice, it can actually do them some good.  This advice
generally solves what I would consider to be dating's version of
"first world problems." An alpha receive a decent amount of romantic
interest, but are only interested in reciprocating some people, and many of the ones desired are unattainable. Alphas are operating in
what you can think of as a one-way marketplace. This is a scenario
that is really easy to model and solve for.  Think of it like buying a
car. These are problems of a buyer's marketplace; you may not be able
to get what you want at a price you want, but you will eventually be
able to get it. And so it is with most of the alphas buying the
self-help books. They may wring their hands about outnumbering men
with bachelor's degrees in NYC by almost 1.4 to 1. But they will be
able to survive, perhaps by dating older men, or dating those without
a degree but with an established career, or a number of
alternatives. To this extent it is a _culling_ problem - being able to
_recognize_ and pursue the best options for you. You might not get the
exact one you want, but given time and the right search strategy, you
will get one you are very happy with.

So if you pick up a self-help book aimed at women, you are going to
find a lot of advice that basically boils down to "how to cull."
Essentially, stop automatically picking the best looking guy, and go
with some more meaningful things. Eventually, this will sink in
courtesy of a book. More likely, it would have just as quickly sunk in
through some other means; the mere fact that a problem was solved by a
$11 investment in a trade paperback where the writer was much more
concerned with readability than scientific rigor means the problem
itself wasn't that hard to begin with, as anguishing as it is for the
person having it.

If you are a beta, you are going to find a lot of this advice
frustrating, as it won't solve your real problems. Why? A beta is in a
"two way marketplace." A two way marketplace is much more
difficult. Dating for betas is like interviewing for jobs. Here's why:
because you are not compelling to many people, you will need meet a
lot of other people, so that you can find some who might have interest
in you. Worse yet, of those who do have interest, many will probably
be betas that you do not find them attractive. This means that the
number of people you need to come in contact with may need to be an
order of magnitude larger than the alphas to succeed. Is some of the
advice, which is mostly about culling, useful? Yes, absolutely. Is it
the most serious problem you need to concentrate on? I wouldn't count
on it!

Worse for the betas, the impression one gets from hearing and reading
all this advice, is that it is _normal_ to be surrounded by suitors,
either asked out regularly or having women flirt with you all the time
and have many of your messages on the dating site returned. *That is
not at all the situation for most normal people*. The sense of
inadequacy and helplessness that this leads to is often a happy
accident for the writers of advice columns in magazines. Their main
business is to sell cosmetics and fashion, not to help you. Self-help
books should be of a different nature, but here again, there may be a
similar effect at play; many books are done to bolster the author's
core business, which is usually dispensing dating advice and
workshops. Such advice doesn't have to be effective, just tantalizing
enough that people keep coming back.

If this stuff makes women insecure, it explicitly aims to make men
feel like outright failures. Men tend to compound their problems with
their over-competitive nature and desire to be seen as successful. So
what many men really want to know isn't "How do I get a girlfriend and
mantain a relationship," but instead: "How do I get with HER?"  or,
"How do I get a lot of BEAUTIFUL women?" This framing allows
con-artist authors a way to make a buck, as they have no qualms about
promising a way for beta men to woo and date alpha women. In general,
men don't buy self-help books, but if you find a desparate mark, you
can bilk a guy out of a lot of money. It's an easy grift - give
unattractive men advice they have heard from their alpha collegues
(who have no trouble inducing interest themselves), and when their
marks report lack of success, you tell them "You're doing it all
wrong," or "You need to project confidence!"  and keep pushing them in
that direction. After all, you don't need to succeed; you just need to
convince them that their success depends on continually forking over
the dough, and make sure their marks know that if they fail, it's
*their* fault.

Men and women disadvantage themselves badly and beat themselves up
because they don't really know the reality of the "average" situation.
Their thought is that their lack of success is abnormal or
atypical. In fact, the truth is a little despressing, were it to be
known. The difference in lives between someone who is very attractive
and someone who is merely pleasant is enormous - much more so than you
would imagine. If you're a guy on a dating site, it's the difference
between having half of your messages responded to and many of them
resulting in in-person meetings, and having one or two percent
responded to, with a chance one of them might result in an in-person
meeting. In other words, an average person is unsuccessful. This is
not about someone who is ugly or deformed. A lot of these statistics
are laid out in _Dataclysm_ (author...). It's similar to the
distribution of wealth in the US. If your goal is to have a salary in
the top 1%, and you don't know that salary is actualy 3.7 MILLION,
then you may not realize how badly you're likely to fail against that
measure.

Many people do realize this, but then think that they can fix their
situation by being
determined to "move up." For the most part, "moving up" is not an
option. If you're heavyset, you can probably drop a few pounds and
keep it off through good eating habits and regular exercise - which
you ought to be doing anyway. This will make you more attractive. It
will not make you Jennifer Lawrence. If you're a 5'6" male, you can
wear shoe lifts.... annnnnnd that's about it. And if you're a woman
who suddenly finds herself single at 39, you can't age backwards.  You
generally can do and should present yourself as well as you can - it
will not only help your self confidence but make the world a little
more pleasant. But it will not suddenly turn around your romantic
life.

So if you're average, you need to take advice intended for the average
person. Not advice written for new college graduates whose main
problem is screening out a plethora of attractive strangers, or people
whose main problem is psychological in nature.

Fortunately, this is one case where math is your friend. You don't
need advice when you have math. And the math says you need NUMBERS. If
you are an alpha who is damaged, you need a shrink, and that's about
it. But if you are a beta, you need to meet a lot of people.

This may mean *gasp* _*moving*_. But if it's serious enough, you'll do
it. Personally I love New York city, but I didn't move here just
because it was fun. No, I had spent five long years in a high-tech
"company town" and another three in Austin, all in my precious
twenties. I had years of horrible luck in spite of doing whatever I
could to improve my horrible love life. When I took a job in Houston -
mainly out of convenience - I found myself was suddenly able to find
dates without changing my approach at all.  For all the effort I spent
all those years, a company move I took without any thought cured my
problems.

This means that if you're a cute single woman in New York that isn't
meeting anyone, it means you may need to *gulp* move to San Fransico,
Boston or somewhere else where the men are outnumbering you. Likewise,
if you're a guy living in Silocon Valley, _*run away*_. You don't need
many millions from your startup to attract someone, you just need to
move somewhere where you have someone to attract.

So while the problem with alphas is generally between the ears, the
problem with betas is just math, and how to improve it. Oh, you can
and should try to improve your looks, get better at socializing, all
that stuff. But you are not going to accomplish a complete makeover
except through the course of years of self improvement. In the
meantime, your happiness can't sit on the back burner.

Now if truly no one is interested in you, and you think you know why,
you may be a gamma - someone who is going to find it very difficult to
marry. In your case, you have two challenges. First, you need to find
out what the problem is. It may not be what you think. If you're
morbidly obese that may be it, but if you're simply a few pounds
overweight, that probably isn't it - there are people around who will
look past that. It is generally due to poor physical presentation
combined with other barriers that must be recognized and treated.

A word about myself and how I relate to this. I would personally
consider myself a beta - a decent enough looking guy who got married
late in life, but being shorter than average and introverted, I had my
work cut out for me. However, for years I operated as a gamma, having
only one date before I turned 26. The combination was a problem of
social skills, poor physical presentation, clinical depression, and a
peer group that was overwhelmingly male, and I had to combat every one
of those just to have a _chance_. That is the tough thing about being a gamma - if you fix the
one obvious thing that is holding you back (in my case, the
depressive personality and poor physique), you may find there are
other serious issues. I didn't have what I'd consider a "normal"
dating life until I hit 30, and even past then, regular girlfriends
were few and far between. But, it did get better. The only time it was
bad was when I made the mistake of comparing my lack of success
against friends I had who did much better without needing to do nearly
any of the work I found necessary. Sometimes the worst thing you can
do for your own happiness is compare yourself to others.