---
title: The Winner's Curse and Christianity
---

# The Winner's Curse and Christianity

I was doing some thinking, as I always do, about the general lack of
interest in religion. By that, I don't necessarily mean lack of
interest in theology. It is more the fact that people generally don't
find it valuable to their lives. The area I live in is a part of the
country that is notably secular, so my perceptions may appear to be a
bit skewed. But given the way the younger generations are moving away
from religion, I suspect this will be of broader concern over time.

The question, really, is what people think religion does for them. For
some, they will profess no interest in theology or philosophy - what
you might call aganotology, in that they really don't care about
questions of belief and unbelief. While some of this can be chalked up
to "secularism," I think this is much as it always is. I doubt very
much that when churches were stronger, that there was much emphasis on
actual hard issues of belief or theology. Had there been, the pulpits
would have thundered with discussions of Augustine and Aquainas, and
the discussions of the last century would have added such greats as
Tillich and Kung and the British idealists like Bradley into the
mix.

But I'm quite sure the only christian churches that fit that
description were some oddball churches on college campuses.
Instead, there have generally been a few other things people
participated in church or religious activities for.

The most trivial-sounding but important reason is simply simply
convention; you did it because your parents did it, and you wanted
your kids to do it to. From that point of view, this may not
necessarily be all that bad; the church became a form of social
capital.

Another one is ethical. For most part, religion is not
theology, but really practical ethics. The theology is just what
serves to justify the ethics. Think about it, when someone is
"sermonizing," i.e. talking like a preacher, they aren't talking about
God; they are talking about ethics, and usually trying you to do
something different than your habitual behaviors.

Likewise, other church-oriented activites are usually dedicated toward
various self-improvement activities, not just abstract like Bible
study, but practical such as childrearing, job-hunting and the
like. During the week, successful churches usually have a number of
activities; AA meetings are usually held in the basement. And many
churches have very sophisticated social and antipoverty platforms.

So let's review: an institution that builds social capital, that
focuses on ethics and self-improvement. Isn't this salient in this
time and place? Who wouldn't want to partake in such organizations?

These are important concerns, yet church membership has declined. And
if you think the problem is lack of religious belief, there are many
organizations that do this sort of thing without religious belief (the
Ethical Cultural Society) that also seem stagnant. The problem is,
these concerns, pressing as they are, is not _the_ central concern of
people in society now. Churches will stagnate insofar as they do not
meet this concern.

For example, let's look at my secular peer group. Few of them go to
church. But it isn't as if they are bad people. Perhaps they feel
themselves to be "religious enough" and don't go to church on Sunday
even though they're technically Catholic. Or they're too busy for
religious activities. The only time the do have is Sunday mornings,
but that may be one of the few times of their week that isn't
overscheduled. They can read a book on self-improvement or controlling
their temper, and that may be far more salient than whatever random
sermon the preacher or priest was going to to throw their way.

Such people will generally agree that churches are good and
necessary. But they are not good _for them_, and may even be seen as
irrelevant; at best, they are seen as too time-consuming. The reason,
to be blunt, is these concerns are not central to life.

Our central concern is one much more individualistic and insidous than
in the past, and a number of religious organizations have attempted to
use that, purposely or not, for ends that are entirely irreligious.

-----------------------------------------

At one time, when religious was universal, it did center around the
central concerns of life. And those concerns were quite different than
they are at this time.

Let's look at the Christianity of the European middle ages. Everyone,
without a distinction, was the same form of christian. Everyone
attended. Why did they attend? Well, in many cases, it was
compulsary. You didn't have a choice. But whether you did or not, the
central concern was the same: _to maintain order and stability_.

Steven Pinker's _The Better Angels of Our Nature: Why Violence Has Declined_
dramatically shows that humankind has gotten remarkably _less_ violent
in our history, and the modern age is especially nonviolent. In the middle
ages, it wasn't that everything was peaceful. But when you think about
it, the question isn't why it was so violent, but why it wasn't even
more violent. There was no modern police force, no
forensics. Committing a crime with impunity just required you either
have no witnesses, leave no witnesses, or be on the right side of the
nobleman who owned your land. What would have prevented rampant
lawlessness and murder?

The central concern for everyone was order, stability, and
dignity. Religion was dedicated to that central concern.

One part of the solution was the church, and its central edict:
maintain order and stability, as well as make sure everyone knew their
place in the world. Part of this was also making sure everyone was
happy with their place in the world. The latter was a central concern
to everyone, albeit for different reasons. The overwhelming number of
people were peasants and serfs without the freedom to better
themselves or their future. Lacking this agency, the church was likely
the only institution to allow them dignity and purpose.

Meanwhile, to the nobleman, the church was equally useful, to keep the
peasants in place. However many armed soldiers a nobleman may have had
under his rule, he certainly didn't want to risk losing them when
murdering a raucous band of pitchfork-weilding peasants, especially
not if executing the surviving rioters as an example to others reduced
the manpower available to work on his manor. The usefulness of the
church in supporting order and stability earned church institutions
roles of prominence long after centuries of the enlightenment left its
secular power whittled down to a small chunk of what was soon to
became Italy.

Historically, other religions through the world served the same
purpose of providing order, stability and dignity. During the middle
ages, the Islamic world served as the occidental cradle of
civilization, cultivating centers of learning such as Baghdad. But
there too, the central concern was promulgating a law-and-order
orientation, whether in areas that historically had little concept of
civilization such as the Middle East and much of North Africa, or
seats of fallen great civilizations in Egypt, the Levant and
Byzantia. Whatever you may think of the Islamic intellectuals that
resurrected the Greek classics and helped build the classic libraries
of the Islamic empires, they exhisted through the indulgence of of
noblemen as much as their European couterparts toiling in Irish
monastaries. This grand history may serve as a point of pride for
today's Muslim intellectuals, but the goal of Islam, like that of
Christianity, was stability, order, and a modicum of relief for the
mass underclass of people propping up various regimes.

If in the occident, the great religious were a stablizing force, in
the orient, they were even moreso. Hinduism itself had at its center a
rigid class system. Meanwhile Buddhism, whatever its virtues as as a
"liberating" religion, tended to live alongside existing folk
religions rather than replacing them.  The net result - all shared the
same central core concerns.

This meant the promulgation of conventional morality, patriarchy,
order, obedience to authority, belonging and knowing one's place in
the world. A set of beliefs so traditional that the word
"traditionalist" is usually synonymous with these beliefs. If you
think of "conservative religious behavior," that description applies
to many old religions around the world, be they Christian, Buddhist,
Islam, Hindu, Taoist... you name it.

But that was then, and this is now. While recognizeable, this hardly
seems like the today's order.

To some extent, if you look at Christian churches in this country,
some still have a message on of stability and order, but this is much
less emphasised. Part of this is because whatever one things of "the
natural order" is now a point of contention, and your religion will
greatly reflect whatever you think that order should be. If you are a
believer of "the old order," you may join a wizened arch-conservative
congregation, no doubt one that has many unhappy things to say about
the way things are right now. If you are instead a believer of the new
order instituted by elightenement Europe, where you view your central
concern as reason, logic and peaceful disagreement between others, you
will be in a different sort of demonination: perhaps a
Unitarian. However, the one thing that stands out among these various
traditionalisms is the fact that they have shed membership in the
aggregate. While one may find demoninations that may on the upswing,
the trend for all such denominations is down.

However, there are denominations that managed to grow in the twentieth
century. The reason? Because they dealt with the central concern in
life in America. Because starting around a hundred fifty years ago,
the American central concern became something quite different. This
concern started during the industrial revolution, but gathered
intellectional force through the newly promulgated Spencerian attitude
of human nature. It has grown to encompass the world. It is an
individualist, isolating concern, compelling enough that the
denominations that catered to it were those that thrived. This central
concern was:

Competing and winning.

Don't believe me? Let's look at what the religious denominations that
found themselves on the upswing preach.

While evangelicals have found themselves finally facing the same
stagnation of membership that their mainline bretheren has faced for
years, this is only recently the case. Up until now, the story of the
evangelicals has been one of continued their growth, mostly by
cannibalizing believers from mainline congregations. The key to their
growth? One is no doubt the effect of the sixties, in which many
mainline congregations sided with the civil rights movement; those
unwilling to listen found it easier to move to an evangelical
congregations that at the time, were careful to divorce themselves
from politics. Another is an occasional emphasis on procreation as a
means of growth. While both are valid, both are easy to overstate, and
overlook the source of the Evangelical appeal.

The Evangelical outlook is one of continuous celebration of victory
and winning.

One of the knocks against these churches is they practice "a religion
about Jesus instead of a religion of Jesus," but that is a criticism
that is fairly easy to level against any creed or philosophy. Any
creed of idealistic intent is going to be aspirational, something one
reaches for rather than actualizes every day. It is necessary to
talk about the path in addition to walking the path, if only to remind
everyone.

But this religion about Jesus is described in a very distinctive
way. It is a triumphalist path of winning and victory, and its appeal
is obvious in a society that prizes winning over all else. It is a
path celebrating Jesus' VICTORY over death, his call to WIN souls to
the cause, to WIN hearts and minds, his eventual TRIUMPH at the end of
time. And of course, if one feels like one is a loser, you can win
again by joining. As Jesus will give you the STRENGTH to BE STRONG in
his cause.

Once one looks at the main draw of these churches, the appeal is
obvious. One can become a winner merely by associated oneself with the
winning team - in this case the Evangelical cause.

Lest you think this is exaggeration, it is easy to see this attitude
in other ways in which these churches conduct business. Interfaith
activities among Evangelicals are practically nonexistent. Without
Christ, you are nothing, and those outside the team will not share in
the victory. The worldview and eschatology are similar; evangelicals
view themselves all on the same team, and prize those outsiders they
deem as being "one of them."

Much could be made of the tribalism of Evangelicals, and much
sociology presumes that a lot of the animating forces behind religions
are tribal in nature. But it seems to me, if it were
true tribalism, there would be a lot more arguments about who is a
"true Christian" and who "belongs." Certainly, at least in the
political realm, there is a sense that they want someone who will
claim is "one of them." But Evangelicals are, if nothing,
Evangelical. They want _everyone_ to be on their team. They just want
their team to **win**, and they don't particularly care if everyone is
on the team or not.

Eventually, one sees the ugly side of this triumphalism. In the
political realm, the masses generally vote for anyone who will promise
them victories, however empty the suit is that makes this promise.

Fortunately or unfortunately, the more pure strains of evangelism have
finally been on the decline, with the so called "prosperity gospel"
churches now being ascendant.

If the 


victory is won merely by associating oneself with the winning team -
in this case, the Evangelical cause.

Is there a problem with this? There are plenty. The most evident is
the fact that by accomodiating itself to this mindset, it validates it
for the millions of believers. It is 


Another problem is if believe there are winners, there must be
losers. And for some Evangelicals, the thrill of victory is only
complete if you hear the anguish of the vanquished. The winners are
those who look like and act like everyone in your church; the losers,
those who have failed to heed the call. Over time, this has taken
overt political ramifications, as many congregants have noted that
many of society's "winners" have little in common with their own
congregation, nor do they seem receptive to joining. Winning, then,
consists of seizing power and using it not for good, but for punishing
what they consider evil. The fact that the current world order may be
defective and evil is never considered by such congregants. Now you
won't hear messages of punishing others coming from the Pastors of
these churches; this isn't their focus at all. But you have to
remember that in Evangelical churches, the Pastors don't run the
show. The church is run by the church boards who hire and fire Pastors
based on how much they like their sermons and how many people they
bring in. It is these boards that have been so aggresive in pushing
voter guides, and those that do what they can to ensure that their
congregants come out as "winners" in real life.

It takes its worst manifestations in the "Gospel of Propserity"
churches. While many Evangelical believers are wise enough to consider this
outlook anathema, they generally overlook these "brothers in Christ"
in spite of the harm they cause. These Prosperity Gospel churches are
blatent in its appeal; give us your money and God will make you a
winner by giving you money. These churches are not entirely meritless
- some messages they send regarding old-time basic morality can only be
described as positive, at least in that the members of their
mostly-working-class congregations feel real-world consequences for
drunkenness and immoral behavior. But overall, the effect is like that
described by one commenter on the Brazillian Evangelical movement, who
said it seemed engineer to extract the maximum amount of funds from
poor people.

As pagan as brutal is this "survival of the fittest" outlook is, its
outlook has proven surprisingly popular with both denominations, and
those who feel forced to play the game in real life and therefore
support such denominations. Indeed, many of the new religious
movements have not been subtle about positioning their spiritual
beliefs as a "technology" by which one can transform oneself from a
loser into a winner. In all too many cases, such quasi-cult movements
have even adopted a "pyramid scheme" manner of recruiting, where
"winners" are determined based on how many bodies they have brought
into the cause. If one thinks such movements have nothing to do with
the attitudes and outlooks that animated the great religions, that's
because they don't.

Is there a solution? It seems so obvious that it's surprising denominations
people haven't used it. It's lack of solution may think that churches
are deliberately ignoring it, and I think that it has to be the central message
of the current age:

It's not about winning and losing.

There were inklings of this in some of the new religious movements
that caught on in "the hippie era." Certainly, there were inklings of
the "turn on tune in drop out" of this period. 